Narendra Modi talked to Vladimir Putin on the margins of the ending Shanghai Society of Cooperation Organization.In Uzbekistan, the leaders of the Member States had a number of bilateral meetings.It was at such a meeting that Prime Minister India allowed himself to assess the Kremlin's actions.

ADVERTISEMENT

More current information from the country and the world on the main page of Gazeta.pl

VIEW VIDEO Col. RES.

Prime Minister of India to Putin: This is not the time of wars

World agencies report that Prime Minister Modi during a meeting with Vladimir Putin was to say that it was not time for war.He also reminded that he had already spoken such words to the Russian leader during telephone conversations.The Prime Minister of India added that it is a dialogue, democracy and diplomacy are the binder of the world.Vladimir Putin replied that he understood the fears of Prime Minister of India.

I know about your position on the conflict in Ukraine and I know about your fears.We want it all to end as soon as possible

- said Putin, whom he quotes, among othersReuters.

The Russian leader thanked Modi for increasing the import of Russian fertilizers to India.According to him, after Western Russia, India sanctions increased the volume of importing of artificial fertilizers eight times.

Putin was also to tell Modie that Ukraine rejected negotiations.In turn, the President of Ukraine Wołodymyr Zelnski emphasizes that he will never accept the "Peace", which will allow Russia to preserve Ukrainian land.

As the Reuters agency recently reported, citing sources close to the Russian leader, Vladimir Putin shortly after the invasion of 24 February was to reject the preliminary peace agreement with Ukraine.The deputy head of Putin's administration Dmitry Kozak recommended the dictator to sign a settlement, but he was to "change his mind".According to the Ukrainian side, the negotiations were only a "smoke veil" (more in the material: Vladimir Putin was to get an offer on Ukraine and reject it. "They said it was to be").

Putin after the invasion of Ukraine and imposing sanctions on his country through the West repeatedly repeated that Russia is not isolated, because it can look to the east, towards the main Asian powers, such as China and India.

The head of the Indian government reported on Twitter on Friday's meeting with Putin, describing them with the adjective "wonderful".

Putin understands China's "fears".The first meeting of the leaders of Russia and China since the outbreak of the war

On Thursday, Vladimir Putin talked to XI Jinping to four -eyes.The Russian leader called the President of China a "dear friend".This is the first meeting of both leaders from this year's Winter Olympic Games in Beijing, before Russia's assault to Ukraine.

We highly value the balanced position of our Chinese friends in connection with the Ukrainian crisis.We understand your questions and doubts in this regard

- with such words Putin addressed the President of China.He added that "American attempts to create a unipolar world will fail."On Thursday, Putin for the first time mentioned the fears of the Chinese associated with the war, which Russia conducts in Ukraine.XI replied that he was very happy that he had met "my old friend" again.

The leaders talked only two after the Kremlin confessed to the defeat of his army in the Kharkov region in Ukraine.At the end of August, the armed forces of Ukraine officially began a counteroffensive.From September 6, the armed forces of Ukraine liberated 3.8 thousand square kilometers, over 300 housing estates and about 150,000 people.However, the actual number of liberated territories in the Kharkov region is almost twice as high.In subsequent cities, Ukrainians discover mass graves and torture rooms, where the Russians detained civilians.

The Shanghai organization of cooperation is an association of eight countries - Russia, India, China, Pakistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, dealing with supporting regional security.Iran is to join the organization.For the Russian president, it was the first such large international forum with the participation of foreign leaders in Ukraine.

Help Ukraine, join the collection.You will pay the money at pcpm.org.pl/ukraina >>>