MINSK, 30 September (BelTA) – Peace in Ukraine can be achieved within several days, Belarusian President Aleksandr Lukashenko said as he accepted credentials of ambassadors of foreign countries in Minsk on 30 September, BelTA has learned.

"If the Europeans genuinely want peace, it can be achieved within days," the Belarusian leader stressed.

"Having lost every third person during the fascist genocide, Belarusians, like no other nation in the world, highly value human life. Every human life!” the head of state noted. “This is one of the reasons why, both earlier and today, with the military conflict raging next to us in Ukraine, we have always come forward with peace initiatives in the international arena and continue doing so. We consider the conflict between the fraternal peoples to be a great tragedy. It is a direct consequence of strategic intrigues and greatest stupidity, primarily of Western politicians."

"The conflict is much discussed today. Many people declare their desire for peace in that land. Especially the Europeans, because the conflict is in our European home. If Europeans genuinely want peace, it can be achieved within days. I have repeatedly stated this and I warn Europeans: please, wise up and do everything to ensure that peace is restored on that land," the Belarusian leader urged.

According to Aleksandr Lukashenko, Belarus has tried its best to prevent this madness. “No need to blame us today for co-aggression or anything of the kind. We have always been together with Russia and will remain so. We have a closer alliance with Russia than the NATO bloc has. What do you want from us? At the same time, we reaffirm our commitment to stay out of the war in Ukraine. Let us cooperate peacefully. The Ukrainians have nothing to blame Belarus for. They have nothing to reproach us, Belarusians, for. We did not start the conflict with Ukraine. It was Ukraine who, earlier than any European country and the United States, had closed the sky for our planes and declared an economic blockade of Belarus. Why are you demanding something from us today? We sacredly comply with our agreements with Russia. Everyone in NATO, never mind the United States, knew about it before the conflict. We have never killed anyone and are not going to do this,” the president said.

According to Aleksandr Lukashenko, Belarus has always been a supporter of negotiations and hosted three rounds of peaceful talks between Russia and Ukraine. “Why have those negotiations been terminated. Who decided to do so? The questions are rhetorical. I say this to you, ambassadors, so that you know our position on the most acute modern problem today. We are doing everything possible to stop the bloodshed. But someone needs this bloodshed. Who? You, diplomats, need to figure it out,” the president said.