In 2014, after the outbreak of the war in eastern Ukraine, he was involved as a mediator between pro -Russian separatists and the Ukrainian side in the Minsk agreements

Wiktor Medwedczuk was placed in home arrest for treason, he managed to escape after the outbreak of Russian aggression to Ukraine - and now he was captured by the Ukrainian special services of SBU.A photo presenting the captured Medwedczuk was shared by the press office of the President of Ukraine, others - SBU.It looks like a trophy.

Medwedczuk is not an ordinary Ukrainian oligarch.He is - or was - the man of Vladimir Putin in Ukraine.Not only that the pro-Russian media was part of his empire, the 67-year-old was a member of the Ukrainian parliament and belonged to the party loyal to the Kremlin.This suspicious businessman, however, has connections not only with Russia, but also with Germany.

In 2014, after the outbreak of the war in eastern Ukraine, he was involved as a mediator between pro -Russian separatists and the Ukrainian side in the Minsk agreements.Even then, Medwedczuk's personality was offensive to many people.It is hard to consider it impartial.

The rest of the article under video material.

Continuation of the material under the video

Nevertheless, he was proposed by the then German Chancellor Angela Merkel.It is she and Frank-Walter Steinmeier (then the then Minister of Foreign Affairs-ed.) Are considered the main architects of the Minsk Agreement, which was to lead peace in eastern Ukraine.As a result of the negotiations, however, the status quo was established, which was unacceptable to both sides of the conflict - and which Russia has acted with its invasion.

Putin's man detained.What will be the fate of Medwedczuk?

Medwedczuk is a part of his family for Putin - he is the godfather of his daughter.At the same time, the Kremlin leader is the godfather of the youngest daughter of Medwedczuk.It was these close ties that made Medwedczuk a mediator between Kiev and Moscow in 2014, when the oligarch was on the US sanction list for months.He also participated in several exchanges of prisoners between Ukraine and separatists in Donbas, occupied by Russia.

However, his career as a mediator ended in 2019, when Wołodymyr Zelnski was elected president.He gave up his position because of misunderstandings with the new head of state.He was in opposition to Zelanski and "saw no sense in his mediation work."Since then, the situation in Ukraine has become uncomfortable for Medwedczuk.

In February 2021, Zelanski ordered the first time to close pro -Russian television stations controlled by Medwedczuk.Then the oligarch was covered by sanctions for financing terrorism in Ukraine, and finally in May 2021 he was arrested at home on the charge of betrayal of state - includingHe was to provide Russia with secret information about the distribution of Ukrainian troops.

At the latest on February 26, two days after the start of the Russian invasion, Medwedczuk escaped from home custody, but not to Russia.Then, three weeks ago, Zelanski banned the activities of the Medwedczuk opposition Platform - for life for the duration of martial law.

Now Wiktor Medwedczuk is to be replaced for captured Ukrainians.In Russia, he would not meet with joyful reception, because from the point of view of Putin Medwedczuk he failed.He was to secure the influence of the Kremlin in Ukraine, make Russia be able to count on politicians friendly to the Kremlin and voters loyal to Russia.The invasion of Russia and the definite resistance of Ukraine showed, however, that nothing was left of the promised pro -Russian society.

Thank you for being with us.Sign up for Onet's newsletter to receive the most valuable content from us.