(CNN)- The Secretary-General of NATO, Jens Stoltenberg and British Prime Minister Boris Johnson said that the West should prepare for a long war in Ukraine, as Russia has achieved additional gains in a fierce battle to control the east of the country.

In separate comments published on Sunday, Stoltenberg and Johnson also confirmed that Western governments should continue to support Ukraine to deter any future aggression by Russian President Vladimir Putin.

"We have to prepare for the fact that it may take years."

He added: "We should not stop supporting Ukraine. Even if the costs are high, not only for military support, but also because of the high energy and food prices."

Boris Johnson wrote in the "Sunday Times" newspaper after his second visit to Kiev on Friday, that Western allies should "prepare ourselves for a long war, as Putin resorted to a campaign of attrition, in an attempt to crush Ukraine with absolute brutality."

Johnson said that the seizure of the Ukrainian region, which covers most of the eastern Ukraine, has been the goal of Putin over the past eight years "when he ignited a separatist rebellion and launched his first invasion."

While Russia was still lacking this goal, "Putin may not realize this, but its great imperial plan to restore the full restoration of Ukraine has gone out of its path. In his isolation, he may still believe that the full invasion is possible."

The two men stressed the need to avoid any Russian aggression in the future.

Stoltenberg said: "If Putin learns the lesson from this war that he can continue in it as he did after the Georgia War in 2008 and occupy the Crimea in 2014, we will pay a much higher price," Stoltenberg said.

Johnson asked what would happen if President Putin was free to keep all regions of Ukraine under the control of Russian forces now.Johnson said: "What if no one is ready to raise his finger when he included this occupied land and its fearful people to Greater Russia? Will this peace be achieved?"

"We and our allies will protect our security as much as Ukraine protects and protect the world from Putin's deadly dreams and those who may seek to imitate it," Johnson said.

Johnson wrote: "Time is the vital factor. Everything will depend on whether Ukraine can enhance its ability to defend its lands faster than Russia's ability to renew its ability to attack. Our mission is to devote time to Ukraine."

Ukrainian officials said on Sunday that the violent fighting continues in the city of Sevirodontsk - the center of the bloody battle in the East Dunbas region of Ukraine - and the surrounding societies where Russian forces are trying to break the resistance of Ukrainian defenders and seize parts of the East Logansk, the area they already control.

During the arrival of Western weapons systems, Ukrainian President Voludimir Zellinski warned this week that the Ukrainian army needs to come faster as Russia accumulates a large artillery feature around the two cities in eastern Ukraine.

American officials insist that Western weapons are still flowing to the front lines of the fighting.But local reports on deficiency of weapons - and the improved calls by Ukrainian officials on the front lines - have raised questions about the effectiveness of operating supply lines.

The Biden Administration announced on Wednesday that it will provide an additional billion dollars as military aid to Ukraine, a package that includes additional shipments of the Hauteer and ammunition and coastal defense systems.While the United Kingdom "plans to work with our friends to prepare Ukrainian forces to defend their country, with the possibility of training up to 10,000 soldiers every 120 days," Johnson said.

While Russia was achieving increasing gains in eastern Ukraine, Johnson stressed the depletion of Russian forces in the fierce battles, saying that Russia would need "years, and perhaps contracts, to replace these devices. An hour by an hour, Russian forces spend the equipment and ammunition faster than their factories can produce".

At the end of this week, Zellinski visited the front lines in the coastal city of Odessa and the southern city of Miklav, both Russian goal in trying to seize the Black Sea coast.

Johnson added that the Russian blockade of the Black Sea ports means that "25 million tons of corn and wheat - the full annual consumption of all the least developed countries - stacked in silos throughout Ukraine."

On the upcoming NATO summit in Madrid, Stoltenberg said that the concept of a new strategy will be adopted, "He will announce that Russia is no longer a partner, but it is a threat to our security, peace and stability."

He said, "The Russian nuclear swords are dangerous and irresponsible. Putin should know that it is not possible to triumph in a nuclear war and should not be launched at all."