The two -day summit of European Union leaders begins in Versailles.They will discuss Russia's invasion of Ukraine, its consequences, as well as the sanctions of the aggressor."We want Ukraine to be free and democratic," the head of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen said before the talks.

The heads of the European Union countries and governments meet on Thursday at a two -day informal summit of the European Council in Versailles in Paris, during which they will discuss subsequent sanctions against Russia for an invasion of Ukraine, including banks and natural persons, and the consequences of war.

Read the report of tvn24.pl: Russia's attack on Ukraine

Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki went to the top.EU leaders, after 17 o'clock, were greeted by French President Emmanuel Macron.

KE boss: This is a defining moment for all of Europe

After arriving at Versailles, the head of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen spoke about the goals of the meeting.

In her opinion, "this is a defining moment for all of Europe" - we see that Putin's war is also a matter regarding the resistance of economies and democracy - she said.She announced that the participants of the summit would of course "talk about Ukraine, which is part of our European family.""We want Ukraine to be free and democratic," said von der Leyen.

- This peak will refer to the significant defense capabilities of the European Union, also energy is very important because we must leave the dependence on fossil fuels from Russia - the head of the European Commission emphasized.

Chairman of the European Council Charles Michel reported that "this peak is strategic".- It is very important to send a very strong signal today and tomorrow about the determination of the European Union, determining the future, how we can withdraw from depending on Russian gas. "

- We will also refer to issues related to European defense.We will talk about European defense abilities, as well as the relationship between this and the current situation in Ukraine - he continued.He emphasized that community members are "determined, united, tough".

As the head of EU diplomacy reminded Josep Borrell, Russia brought a war to Ukraine "for no reason".- We have to work in two directions at the meeting with leaders - he said.

The first is - as he said - "how to continue to put pressure on Russia, that she ends this crazy war, to end her civilians, how to take diplomatic actions, but also to introduce sanctions."- And secondly, how to increase the resistance of the European Union - he added.

The French President Emmanuel Macron, on the other hand, talked about the issue of incorporating Ukraine in the European Union.He reminded that Moldova and Georgia also submitted the application.

- We'll talk about it tonight.It will be an important debate, because first of all you need to send a strong signal to Ukraine and Ukrainians - he said.- Can we open the accession procedure today with the country that is conducting war?I don't know.Should we close the door, say: no, never?That would be unfair.We must be very careful - said the President of France.

PAP: No agreement on the conclusion

The chairman of the European Council Charles Michel in the invitation to the summit indicated that unpredit and unjustified Russian military aggression on Ukraine grossly violates international law and undermines European security.

- This conflict and its consequences will be the focal point of our informal meeting in Versailles on March 10-11 - he said.He added that the topic of discussion will be the development of EU defense capabilities, reducing energy dependence on Russian gas, oil and coal, as well as the construction of a strong EU economic base.

According to the EU sources of the Polish Press Agency, EU ambassadors did not agree on Wednesday in Brussels on the draft conclusion of the EU summit.Poland, the Baltic States, Slovakia and the Czech Republic want them to have calls for further sanctions against Russia and a positive signal for Ukraine membership in the EU.

Watch TV live on TVN24 GO

Author/ author: AKR/ Tam