It cannot be said in public .. You will not believe the name of this new beer that is sold to help collect funds for Ukraine

Away from bombs and bullets ... inside a famous ski resort in Ukraine that turns into refugees from the Russian invasion

Dubai, United Arab Emirates (CNN)- It is not likely that Ukraine's visit is currently leading, the list of countries that travelers want to go to .. They will not like to live a living in the war, for example, or visit the cities that have been bombed, or a sense of danger ..

However, 6 months after Russia invaded the country, and the death and destruction it left, one of the tourist organizations invites tourism to visit it.

The Visit Ukraine.town online platform has launched daily tours to what it called "Brave Cities" accompanied by guides.They are the cities that challenge the Russian invaders, and are still resisting.

Tours offer a look at the country's daily pension in the midst of the ongoing conflict.

The Visit Ukraine.tode is encouraging people to visit Ukraine now.Credit: Visit Ukraine

Despite international warnings of traveling to Ukraine, the company sold 150 tickets to date, according to what it mentioned, while its website, which provides information about how to travel safely to and from Ukraine, receives 1.5 million visits per month, and this is a 50% increase from numbersBefore the invasion.

Although it may seem a horrific way to spend a vacation, Anton Tanninko, founder of the Visit Ukraine website and its executive director, told CNN that it is different from "dark tourism" during which visitors flow into sites that were witnessing death, disasters, and destruction around the world.

Foreign governments have warned their citizens against visiting the country.Credit: Visit Ukraine

Tanninko believes that the tours are an opportunity for Ukraine to rise from the spirit of challenge among its citizens, and spreading a message to the outside world that life continues, even in the event of war.

"Live life, whatever it is,"

The founder of Visit Ukraine, and its executive director, Anton Tanninko, believes that the tours are an opportunity to highlight the spirit of challenge among the country's citizens.Credit: Visit Ukraine

"It is not only related to bombs," Traninko stressed.

Tranino pointed out that they are "sometimes happy, and they do not experience bad and sad events only as TV stations show. Life continues, and there is hope that all of this will end soon," adding that "children grow up, and we try to live life as much as possible, whatever the circumstances."

Despite international warnings that advise not to travel to Ukraine, the company has sold 150 tickets so far, according to what it mentioned.Credit: Visit Ukraine

The US State Department has now issued a fourth level warning that is advised not to travel to Ukraine because of the Russian invasion, in conjunction with other countries ’similar alerts.

However, Tanninko urges people to visit, but added that it is important that tourists be aware that there is no 100% safe place in Ukraine, but the presence of a guide may help reduce the danger.

Tranino acknowledges the risk of visiting Ukraine, but he believes that the guides will reduce it.Credit: Visit Ukraine

Visit Ukraine won the government's appreciation for its initiative to support the affected tourism industry in the country as a result of the war, and to provide information to help arriving and departing citizens.

But there is no official approval for her current campaign to encourage the visit.

"Not now the time to visit, but after our victory and the end of the war, we will invite people to visit Ukraine," Mariana Olisif, head of the government agency for tourism development in Ukraine told CNN.

"Like throwing dice"

Tours offer a look on how to live daily in the country in the midst of conflict.Credit: Visit Ukraine

Although travel is possible, independent travel security experts warn of this.

The UK, the UK, said that the areas that seem safe in Ukraine can pose a real danger.

"I call for extreme caution due to the ongoing Russian random attacks," McGrath told CNN, adding: "Although the far west of Ukraine is relatively safe ... the southeast is much more dangerous. It will be more like throwing a dice."

Regardless of the risks, there is a desire to visit Ukraine.

Tanninko reported that out of 150 tickets sold so far, 15 of which belong to Americans.

Tourist groups will consist of a maximum of 10 people.

Tourists will be met at the meeting points, and they will be prepared for how to act in the event of a dangerous position.