Andrij Deszczyca spoke about the threat of Russian aggression on Ukraine in "one on one" ambassador of this country in Poland.He said that Ukraine was prepared for the worst situation.When asked what sanctions can convince Vladimir Putin to stop, rain said that "first of all you have to stop Nord Stream 2".

Russia has concentrated over 100,000 soldiers at the border with Ukraine.Experts and Western countries talk about the growing threat of Russian aggression on this state.

The Ukrainian ambassador to Poland Andrij Deszczyca said that his country "is prepared to develop the worst situation, including the possible military invasion of Russia."

- It is not that we do nothing, but we try to calm society that you do not have to panic.For eight years we have been waging a war with Russia, and the situation on the Russian -Ukrainian border, when it comes to the number of Russian soldiers, is more or less the same as it was in April last year - he added.

He emphasized, however, that "we must be prepared for every possible development" situation.Deszczyca added that "this scenario is not excluded, but it is unlikely in the coming weeks, because diplomatic talks at a fairly high level are planned."- We expect that during these conversations, as long as the diplomatic channels are open, there will be no invasion - said the Ukrainian ambassador to Poland.

As he said, he does not rule out that one of the scenarios of Russia is a change in power in Kiev.- This power, this government and the president does not really respond to Russia because they do not want to undergo Russia's demands.We are not ready to listen to Russian requirements.It is no secret that Russia has already tried to change the government in Ukraine several times since 2014 and put someone there to be very loyal - he added.

What can stop Putin?

When asked what sanctions they can convince Vladimir Putin to stop, rain said that "first of all you have to stop Nord Stream 2, because I think it looks like it is such a lamemus paper."

- Then economic sanctions against the largest Russian companies that run businesses in the world and which support the regime in Moscow, personal sanctions against Russian politicians and also disconnecting Russia from banking systems - he mentioned.

PAP/ Reuters/ Maciej Zieliński

Ambassador of Ukraine in Poland: is the readiness of the Polish side

The rain was asked if the President of Ukraine Volodymyr Zełenski talked to Polish President Andrzej Duda about the fact that Polish soldiers could hit Ukraine, he denied.- At the moment we are talking about weapons, war equipment and ammunition, which Poland can pass on to Ukraine if necessary - he said.

Deszczyca: We are consulting with Poland regarding the transfer of TVN24 military equipment to Ukraine

Asked whether during the talks of the presidents there was a request for Poland to hand over military equipment to Ukraine, the ambassador replied in the affirmative.

- Earlier, a list of the equipment we need to be forwarded to the Ministry of Defense.We consult what equipment is most needed at this time - said the ambassador.

He added that "is the readiness of the Polish side to convey such equipment and ammunition."To beyond that some countries, in this US, have already sent equipment to Ukraine, razczyca said that "we also expect Poland to do the same."

Author/author: JS/KA

Source: tvn24