MINSK, 7 February (BelTA) – The West understands the futility of the war with the forces of the Collective Security Treaty Organization , Belarusian President Aleksandr Lukashenko said in an interview with the VGTRK journalist, radio and TV host Vladimir Soloviev, BelTA has learned.

Vladimir Soloviev asked the head of state whether he sees the possibility of a major war in Europe.

"No, we have been living too comfortably," the president replied. “Comfort is very important. When a person begins to think: "A war will break out tomorrow. We will have to move to dugouts, as we did in Belarus..."

"We will. This is not a new thing for us. Meanwhile the Americans will not. They are far away," the journalist said.

"Exactly! This is what I am talking about,” the head of state agreed. “That's for first. On a human level."

"Secondly, the CSTO operation [the peacekeeping operation in Kazakhstan] showed that while they will be deploying and sending some troops here, we will reach the English Channel. They know that. We have shown that we are capable to respond quickly to threats. Troops were not many. If needed, we would have increased their numbers there. Belarus guarded the airfields near Almaty, and Russia - in Nursultan," Aleksandr Lukashenko said.

The head of state is convinced that the West understands the futility of a war with the CSTO forces. "In Europe, it will be easier. Don't they see it? They understand that it is futile to fight against us, first of all, against Russia. I am not talking about nuclear weapons and other weapons. But they'd better back off!" the president warned.

Vladimir Soloviev, in turn, noted that the West itself does not want to go to war with the CSTO, but plans to provoke a conflict with Ukraine.

"Ukraine will never fight against us: this war will last three to four days a most. There will be no one there to fight against us. The reports of people training with wooden rifles... You and I can make a video on a mobile phone of us training in the next hall," Aleksandr Lukashenko said. “Ss soon things have started to get a bit more serious, Volodya Zelensky immediately chickened out."