MINSK, 17 September (BelTA) – Polish, Lithuanian and Latvian politicians naively expect to earn their future in the new realities, Belarusian President Aleksandr Lukashenko said at the patriotic forum "This is OUR History!" to mark the Day of People's Unity in Minsk on 17 September, BelTA has learned.

"The collapse of Ukraine has already begun. Polish, Lithuanian and Latvian politicians, apparently, naively expect earn their future in the new geopolitical realities. They repeat the mistake of the late 1930s - early 1940s. You remember how everyone licked the boots of Nazi Germany and Hitler. The leadership of Poland was especially groveling. What did that lead to? In early September, within two weeks, Poland ceased to exist. It is a pity that our neighbors did not learn their history lessons. But the main thing is that we remember our historical experience, and our grandchildren did not have to build national statehood anew," Aleksandr Lukashenko said.

He noted that today is a difficult time, and only a lazy person did not draw a parallel between the events of the 19th - early 20th century and the present day. "Everyone remembers how the reluctance of great empires to negotiate ends. The Napoleonic invasion, two world wars and several dozen local conflicts. Hundreds of millions of lives. What about today? The United States is pushing Europe into a military confrontation with Russia on the territory of Ukraine. They are not hiding their plans - the contracts have already been concluded for years to come. Ukraine will be destroyed to the ground. The goal is to weaken Russia and destroy Belarus," the President said.

Another target of the "overseas masters" is Europe, he added. "America is the only beneficiary of what is happening here: Europe will be put in its place, and competitors will be removed. Today Ukraine, tomorrow it will be Moldova or the Baltic states, Poland or Romania. The United States is fanning the war in Kosovo, putting pressure on Serbia, adding fuel to the smoldering contradictions in Karabakh, muddying the waters in Syria. Not everything is easy in Afghanistan and neighboring states. Washington has its hand in all significant political conflicts, while completely ignoring internal contradictions on the verge of civil confrontation," Aleksandr Lukashenko said.