Wołodymyr Złenski is afraid of the attack from Belarus - says "Kyiv Independent" on Friday.The Ukrainian daily reports that the President of Ukraine was to convene a special meeting in this matter.After its completion, Zelanski issued a recommendation for readiness to defend in four episodes.However, it was not given what episodes were about.

ADVERTISEMENT

Media: Ukraine is afraid of an attack from the territory of Belarus

Secretary of the National Security Council and Defense of Ukraine Oleksy Daniłow announced that the President of Ukraine Wołodymyr Zelanski had previously ordered the appropriate state authorities to assess the risk of a possible invasion of Russian troops from Belarus.After performing this analysis, he decided to strengthen the protection of the border.

- All authorities involved in the problem presented their assessment of the situation, what is happening in Belarus - said the secretary of the National Security Council and the defense of Ukraine Oleksy Daniłow, quoted by the Interfax agency.

He added that Ukraine checked the state of the Belarusian army, how many Russian military in it, what are the further plans.

You can read more latest information on Gazeta.pl.

See the video China draw conclusions from the war in Ukraine?Dr. Occupation: No

Wołodymyr Zielnski at a meeting with European leaders appealed for the supply of weapons

- Russian aggression against Ukraine is aggression against all over Europe - said President Zełnski on Thursday.He met there with the President of France Emmanuel Macron, German Chancellor Olaf Scholz, Italian Prime Minister Mario Draghim and President of Romania Klaus Iohannis.The President of Ukraine appealed, among othersabout the supply of weapons.

Wołodymyr Zelanski emphasized that since Russia threatens all of Europe, the response to Russian aggression should be common.As he explained, during the meeting they talked about the economic support of Ukraine, sanctions against the Russian Federation and counteracting the wave of hunger that Russia wants to cause.The Ukrainian president also informed partners about the situation on the front.

He noted that his country appreciates the already given help, but awaits new supplies above all heavy weapons, contemporary artillery systems and anti -cancer defense systems.- Each such weapon party is saved Ukrainians - he emphasized.

Emmanuel Macron promised that France would give Ukraine six additional Caesar artillery systems.He also promised that Ukraine would decide on the context and format of peace conversations.As he assured, no concessions to Russia will be required from Ukraine.

The leaders of Germany, France, Italy and Romania also expressed support for giving Ukraine the status of a candidate to the European Union.