- If it depends on the Russian Federation, there will be no war.We do not want wars, but we will not let our interests seriously violate and ignore them - said Lavrov

As he described, in the West's answers in many respects "grain of rationality" was contained in "secondary topics"

He stipulated, however, that Russia will decide about how to the Western proposals, President Vladimir Putin will decide

Lavrov also said that if the President of Ukraine Wołodymyr Zełenski wants, he could come to Moscow, Sochi or St. Petersburg to talk about the normalization of bilateral relations

More similar information can be found on the Onet's main page

-As for the threat of sanctions, we told the Americans, including during the contacts of the presidents, that this package (...), which will be accompanied by full exclusion of financial and economic systems controlled by the West, will be synonymous with the break of relations-announced Ławrow.

Both chambers of the American Congress have recently prepared projects of a wide catalog of sanctions, includingAgainst the main Russian financial institutions and mining industry, as well as the Nord Stream 2. In the currently proposed form, these sanctions would be adopted after the US President found that there was a resumed aggression against Ukraine.

President Joe Biden stated on Tuesday that he was considering imposing direct sanctions on President Vladimir Putin in the case of Russian invasion of Ukraine.

The rest of the text under video material.

Lavrov: We don't want war, but we won't let our interests ignore

- If it depends on the Russian Federation, there will be no war.We do not want wars, but we will not let us seriously violate our interests and ignore them - he said.According to him, proposals for security guarantees that the United States presented are better than those proposed by NATO.

As he described, in the West's responses "grains of rationality" in "secondary topics" were contained in many respects.According to him, it isAbout such topics as the problem of medium and low range rockets, arose after the US leaving the Treaty on the total elimination of indirect missiles

He stipulated, however, that Russia would decide about how to the West's proposals, President Vladimir Putin decides.

He added that talks with the USA and NATO about security have not yet ended and announced another Russian-American meeting within a few weeks.

He warned, however, that since the United States would insist that they would not change their position on security guarantee, Russia will not change its own either.According to him, the American position is based on distorting facts, and Russian "on what we signed".

"I don't see any compromise opportunities here, otherwise if you arrange, if the old decisions are boycotted and distorted by them," he said.

Lavrov also said that "he wants to believe" in ensuring the Secretary of State of USA Antony Blinken that the US wants to contribute to the implementation of Minsk agreements on Ukraine.- If they get the sticks to fill in Minsk agreements - and I think that apart from them, no one can do it - then of course we will be satisfied with such a result - he added.

Lavrov: There will be no Ukrainian war on the part of the Russian Federation.

On the part of Russia, there will be no war with Ukraine, but it is possible that someone wants to provoke war around Ukraine - said on Friday the head of Russian diplomacy Sergei Lavrov in an interview with radio stations.

- There will be no Ukrainian war on the part of the Russian Federation.But I do not rule out that someone would like to provoke war around Ukraine, ”said Lavrov.

Lavrov also said that if the President of Ukraine Wołodymyr Zełenski wants, he could come to Moscow, Sochi or St. Petersburg to talk about normalizing bilateral relations.He added that if Zelanski wants to talk about the issue of Donbass, then he should ask the contact group in which the Four of the Four's decision is to be discussed by these issues.