The partner relations between Germany and Russia and their addiction to Russian gas were denied by the war in Ukraine.Not only did it turn out how exposed Berlin to the Kremlin's energetic blackmail, but also that the import of raw materials from Russia is a financing of her war operations - reminds the British weekly.

"Sleeping Europe Giant" woke up

However, the invasion of Ukraine has awakened the "Sleeping Giant" and can make the change of Berlin's policy lead to something that will be "Putin's personal nightmare", i.e. stronger and more bold German, in a more united Europe - says "Economist".

"The good news is that the challenges (for Germany) are to be overcome. When Putin began the invasion, Germany imported 55 percent of their gas from Russia. Pessimists warned that if (Russian) deliveries disappear, German factories would close and families would beIn your kitchens tremble from cold, "writes the weekly.

The rest of the text under the video material:

Continuation of the material under the video

However, despite limiting gas imports from Russia, raw material reserves grow in Germany at a normal pace.The industry announced that it could reduce gas consumption much more than expected.Germany re -launches coal power plants, invest in renewable energies and will probably extend the functioning of the nuclear gym.They should also bear the ban on shale gas extraction and reach for its large reserves - says "Economist".

End of pacifism in Germany?

Chancellor Olaf Scholz announced an increase in defense expenditure, a more realistic foreign policy and a departure from the "pacifist taboo", help for Ukraine and a thorough search for relations with China.He is also to present a national security strategy soon.

The deep ties of Germany with Europe and the US are another advantage of Germany, where it can be built in the future, especially since more reliable Germany will be a country very attractive to investors - says the weekly.

However, there is a risk that support for Scholz's policy will weaken when the costs associated with war and rising energy prices will change the attitude of voters, who for now mostly support the chancellor of the Chancellor towards Russia and Ukraine.However, if "Germany abandoned Ukraine, it would be a tragedy, for Germans and Ukraine. It is a conflict that determines the future of the continent" - concludes "Economist".

Thank you for being with us.Sign up for Onet's newsletter to receive the most valuable content from us.