Russian soldiers surrounded Ukraine, Russian forces plan to attack Ukraine in the coming days, their goal is Kiev - said the President of the United States Joe Biden.At the same time, he added that it is still not too late for Russia to choose the path of diplomacy.

Ukraine is threatened by a Russian attack.The latest information on this matter was provided by US President Joe Biden.

Biden: At the moment I am convinced that Putin has made a decision

Biden said that he has recently talked to other leaders many times.On Friday evening there was a teleconference with the participation of EU and NATO leaders, including President Andrzej Duda.

"The message of unity was prevailing," Biden said.

At the same time, the American president pointed out that "Russian soldiers have now surrounded Ukraine, Russian forces plan to attack Ukraine in the coming days, their goal is Kiev."

Biden was asked by journalists whether in his opinion Vladimir Putin has already decided on the invasion of Ukraine.- At the moment I am convinced that Putin made a decision.We have reasons to be careful - he replied.He referred to the "significant intelligence skills" of the USA.

Biden assessed that the attack could take place in the next few days, although he added that it is still not too late for Russia to choose the path of diplomacy."It's still not too late to sit at the negotiating table," he emphasized.He added that Russia faced the choice whether he would follow "the path of war or the path of diplomacy."

Biden about the weapon of "every inch" NATO territory

At the same time, the US President assured that the United States and allies "are prepared to defend every inch of NATO territory."

- We will not send soldiers to Ukraine, but we will support it in various ways, (...) the US will provide further support for the Ukrainian people - he added.He also said that in the case of the Russian invasion, US sanctions and their allies imposed on Moscow will be slightly different.

Biden: Russia makes false accusations

The US President announced that if Russia chooses an attack on Ukraine, he will bear a high cost.

He also talked about disinformation that Russia spreads, suggesting that Ukraine was preparing for the offensive in Donbas.- There is no evidence of this type of statement, they deny the basic logic to believe that the Ukrainians will choose this moment when we have over 150,000 soldiers around the borders of Ukraine in order to escalate the conflict of summer - he said.

- Russia also makes false charges in the context of potential genocide in Donbas.He presents such statements saying that Ukrainians attack the Russians without any grounds - continued Biden.

As the President of the United States added, presenting such statements is part of the scheme of actions that Russia has already taken.

Author/author: MJZ // Now