Viktor Orban referred to the war in Ukraine and once again stood up for Russia.According to the Prime Minister of Hungary, the European Union strategy does not work and should be changed to another.He also accused Europe that its actions only lead to the extension of the conflict.Politics' statements quite significantly resembled Kremlin propaganda.We wrote more about this in the article below.

ADVERTISEMENT

War in Ukraine.The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine corresponds to Orban: Putin will not stop until he destroys the European order

The speech of Viktor Orban did not overdo it in Ukraine - a spokesman for the Ukrainian Ministry of Foreign Affairs Oleh Nikołenko referred to the matter on Saturday.His entry appeared on July 23 on Facebook.

"Sanctions did not weaken Russia - this is a classic example of Russian propaganda. The sanctions are effective, significantly reduced the ability of the Russian war machine to wage a war against Ukraine. Weapons supply (from the West) save the lives of Ukrainians" - wrote Nikołenko.He added if the sanctions were inefficient, then Russia would not involve the huge resources to stop them.

Read more information from Ukraine on Gazeta.pl.

See the video this was the transport of destroyed Russian tanks for the exhibition in Warsaw

Oleh Nikolanko admitted that Europe is experiencing economic and political crisis, but "not because of sanctions, but through the Russian hybrid war.""Russia attacks Ukraine with maneuvering rockets, and Europe with sky -high gas prices. (...) Closing his eyes to Russia's crimes in Ukraine, no peace in Europe will rebuild. Putin will not stop until he destroys the European order, based on democratic values" - - - - -The spokesman for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine said.

"Without peace and stability in Ukraine, there will be no peace and stability in Hungary, nor at all in Europe. The European strategy must be based on a common, decisive action and unity to help stop the war and pull Russia responsible for its crimes. And we are.We will definitely defeat Russia for our European partners for their relentless position, even despite the fears of the head of the Hungarian government, that the Russian army has an "asymmetrical advantage" " - wrote Nikołenko at the end.

The politician added that Viktor Orban criticized the EU sanctions the day after the visit of the head of the Hungarian Ministry of Foreign Affairs Peter Szijjarto in Moscow.Then he asked Russia to increase gas supply.