Russian troops are bearing down on Ukraine's capital after the Kremlin launched its long-anticipated military operation on Thursday.

Ukraine's health minister said on Saturday that 198 civilians, including three children, had been killed so far by Russian forces.

Meanwhile, Russia's military has reported destroying key pieces of Ukraine's infrastructure - while keeping silent on potential Russian casualties.

Vladimir Putin, the Russian president, cautioned other countries that any attempt to interfere would "lead to consequences you have never seen in history” in a televised address as the attack began.

A wave of sanctions has followed as the window for diplomacy closes.

Here we break down how the crisis reached this point and what could be next.

What’s happening in Ukraine?

Mr Putin launched a “special military operation” against Ukraine early on Thursday morning to eliminate what he called a serious threat and “de-nazify” the country.

The crisis has been looming for weeks after as many as 190,000 Russian troops massed close to Ukraine, alongside 1,200 tanks, fighter jets and long-range missile batteries, sparking the biggest crisis in East-West ties since the Cold War.

Russian troops captured the southeastern Ukrainian city of Melitopol, Russia's Interfax news agency said, as Moscow launched coordinated missile and artillery attacks on several cities including Kyiv.

The bulk of Russian forces involved in the advance on Ukraine's capital Kyiv are now 19 miles from the city centre, James Heappey, the foreign minister, said.

Ukrainian forces repelled a Russian attack in the Lviv region near Brody in western Ukraine.

Around 100,000 people have crossed into Poland from Ukraine since Russia launched its invasion, including 9,000 who have entered since 7am on Saturday.

Mr Putin said the military operation was needed to protect civilians in eastern Ukraine - a claim the US had predicted he would falsely make to justify an invasion.

The Russian president accused the US and its allies of ignoring Russia's demands to block Ukraine from ever joining Nato and offer Moscow security guarantees.

What’s behind the Russia-Ukraine crisis?