You can track information about the defense of Ukraine around the clock in our live coverage

More important information can be found on the Onet's main page.If you don't want to miss any important messages - sign up for our newsletter

The conditions of the inspection proposed by Washington "de facto de facto the Russian Federation right to inspection on American territory" because Russian experts and crew members of their aircraft would have problems obtaining American visas in connection with sanctions imposed on Moscow due to the Ukrainian conflict - says the Foreign Ministry, the ForeignHe emphasizes, however, that Russia recognizes that it is fully obliged to follow the treaty.

Treaty on reducing nuclear weapons.Joe Biden: The USAs are ready to be negotiable

The New Start is a treaty signed in 2010 and extended in 2021, which imposes a limit of 1550 strategic nuclear heads on the USA and Russia, as well as their transfer means.

Last Monday, US President Joe Biden announced that the United States is ready to negotiate a new treaty on reducing nuclear weapons, which will replace the current New Start agreement expiring in 2026.

Biden added, however, that because Russian aggression on Ukraine is "an attack on the fundamental principles of international order", Russia should demonstrate that it is ready to negotiate.

The Russian embassy at the UN announced that the United States withdrew from talks with Moscow in connection with the conflict in Ukraine and now they must decide if they want to return to these conversations.

USA: Pentagon announced the 18th aid package for Ukraine.Russia is not satisfied

On Monday, August 8, Pentagon announced a new military assistance package for Ukraine.It is worth $ 1 million.The tranche includedAmmunition for Himars and Air Defense systems NASAMS, as well as 20 120 mm and 75,000 caliber mortars.155 mm bullets for howitzers.This is 18. In turn, and the largest from the beginning of the start of the Russian invasion of the Military Equipment Aid Package from the USA for Ukraine.

The total value of military aid declared by the US for Ukraine has been $ 9.1 billion since the beginning of the invasion.The value of assistance from 2014 is $ 11.8 billion.Russia is not delighted with this - she has often criticized the United States for helping Ukraine.

- We believe that the United States deliberately add olive oil to the fire - said in June the spokesman of the Kremlin Dmitry Pieskov, indicating that the deliveries of Ukraine defends Ukraine increases the risk of involvement of a third country in conflict.

Thank you for being with us.Sign up for Onet's newsletter to receive the most valuable content from us.