The upper house of the Polish parliament, the Senate, has passed a resolution in support of Ukraine.

The document was unanimously adopted on Friday, February 4, with 92 votes in favor. No one abstained or voted against the resolution, according to an Ukrinform correspondent.

According to the resolution, a free Ukraine is one of the guarantors of Poland's security. Poland was the first country to recognize Ukraine's independence, and the next Polish governments supported the strategic partnership between Kyiv and Warsaw.

"Today, Ukraine faces a mortal danger - the threat of a new invasion. Therefore, it is very important that the Polish authorities reliably support our neighbor, as there is no secure Poland without an independent Ukraine," the resolution reads.

According to the document, Poland's Senate supports the provision of political and financial assistance to Ukraine, the supply of weapons, as well as the participation of NATO military in training Ukrainian service members. It is emphasized that all actions aimed at deterring the aggressor have a huge impact on the morale of the Ukrainian people.

According to the document, Russia has amassed a huge army on Ukraine's borders, including tanks, artillery, ships and combat aircraft.

"The purpose of this escalation of tensions is to destabilize Europe. This could lead to an outbreak of the largest armed conflict since World War II," Polish senators said.

In 1994, the United States, Britain and Russia pledged to respect Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity and to refrain from any threat of force against its independence in exchange for Kyiv giving up its nuclear capabilities. Ukraine has fulfilled its obligations, but Russia nevertheless attacked Ukraine in 2014, annexed Crimea and controls separatists in the Donbas, the resolution said.

"Before another Russian invasion, Ukraine is unconditionally supported by the North Atlantic Alliance, the EU and the United States. Authorities in Kyiv began strategic cooperation with NATO in 1997, and Allies in 2008 agreed to its future membership. Today, we are facing the test of this open door policy," the resolution reads.

It is noted that the Senate is convinced of the possibility of dialogue with Russia. However, this cannot happen in the face of military blackmail, undermining the principles of inviolability of borders in Europe and hybrid attacks on democratic institutions.

"The condition for this dialogue is the withdrawal of Russian troops from the Ukrainian border," the senators said.

After its adoption, the document will be published in the government's Monitor Polski newspaper.

Ukraine's Ambassador to Poland Andrii Deshchytsia was present in the Senate hall during the vote. To the applause of Polish lawmakers, Senate Marshal Tomasz Grodzki symbolically handed over the text of the resolution to the Ukrainian diplomat.

On January 27, the Polish Sejm also adopted a resolution in support of Ukraine.

op