Jake Sullivan emphasized at the Friday conference that the USAs are ready for "all scenarios" regarding the escalation of tension around Ukraine.Security advisor Joe Biden spoke about the forms that Russian aggression can adopt according to the American authorities.

ADVERTISEMENT

See the video exercises of the US elite division, which is to partly reach Poland

Jake Sullivan with an assault to Ukraine: one of the scenarios is a quick attack on Kiev

- If Russia attacks Ukraine, it probably begins with bombing and rocket attacks, which will result in victims among civilians, regardless of their nationality - he said and appealed to American citizens to leave Ukraine.

Sullivan emphasized that "Russia has so many strength [gathered at the border with Ukraine - ed.] To carry out a large military operation."The adviser was asked during the conference what a possible invasion could look like.

- It can be a number of different forms of action.One of them is a quick attack on Kiev.This is the script we analyze.Russians can take it.They can also decide to act in other parts of Ukraine.We are deeply convinced that if Russia decided to invade, it would try to create some excuse, provocation, something for which they would be able to blame Ukrainians - he said.- We are talking about it in public, because the world should know that such a provocation can be the cause of a possible attack on Ukraine - he added.

More news about the situation around Ukraine on Gazeta.pl's main page.

Russia-Ukraine conflict.On Saturday, Blinkn-Wławrow and Biden-Putin talks

Sullivan announced on Friday that the Russian invasion of Ukraine may begin during the Beijing Olympic Games.The American security advisor has reported that at the moment none of the intelligence information indicates that the Russian President has made the final decision as to the invasion.He noted that at the same time he could not speculate about the motivation and thoughts of Vladimir Putin.He did not rule out, however, that such an order could have been issued.

On Saturday, a conversation between the heads of American and Russian diplomacy is to take place - said American Secretary of State Antony Blinken during a visit to Fiji.Negotiations with Sergei Lavrov are to be another attempt to avoid the Russian-Ukrainian conflict.

The US Secretary of State said that the United States see "disturbing signals of Russian escalation" on the border with Ukraine.These include, among others, another Russian troops on the border.Blinkken added that the crisis solution would have to be associated with discharging the tension on the border of Russia.He added that the Americans are still ready to talk if Moscow is ready for it.He also warned that in the event of an invasion of Ukraine, Americans and allies would quickly introduce severe economic sanctions.

Also on Saturday, Joe Biden's telephone conversation with Vladimir Putin is scheduled.Emanuel Macron is also to talk to the President of the Russian Federation.