The leader of Belarus Alaxandr Lukashenko announced that his country did not want a war, which, in his words, could explode only if Belarus or her close ally Russia will be directly attacked.The declaration of Russia's lack of willing to armed conflict was also expressed by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of this country Sergei Ławrow.He emphasized, however, that subsequent western sanctions imposed on Moscow would be tantamount to breaking relations.

Alaxandr Łukaszenka appeared on Friday before the Belarusian parliamentarians and officials.As he said, Minsk is not interested in war.In his opinion, the open conflict can only break out if Belarus or its close ally Russia is directly attacked.Asked about the conflict in Ukraine, Lukashenko admitted that he was "almost sure" that there would be no war.

The Belarusian leader also referred to the trade union Russian -Belarusian military maneuvers planned for the next month - 2022. As he said, the exercises are to be a hint for the authorities in Minsk, where Belarus should concentrate its forces.He also added that his country must defend his southern flank on the border with Ukraine.

Lavrov: Russia does not want war, but new sanctions will be tantamount to breaking relations

Similar declarations regarding Russia's reluctance towards a possible conflict were made by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of this country Sergei Lavrov.- If it depends on the Russian Federation, there will be no war.We do not want wars, but we will not allow us to seriously violate our interests and ignore them - he said.

- There will be no Ukrainian war on the part of the Russian Federation.But I do not rule out that someone would like to provoke war around Ukraine - said Lavrov.He also said that if the President of Ukraine Wołodymyr Zełenski wants, he could come to Moscow, Sochi or St. Petersburg to talk about the normalization of bilateral relations.

The head of Russian diplomacy positively referred to the US responses to the Kremlin's demands regarding so -called security guarantees.He pointed out that the proposals submitted by the United States were better than those that Russia offered NATO.He added that in the coming weeks he was expecting a meeting with the Secretary of State Antony Blinken.Lavrov repeated that President Vladimir Putin would decide about Russia's further actions towards Western proposals.

- As for the threats of introducing sanctions, we told the Americans, including during the presidents' contacts, that this package (...), which will be accompanied by full exclusion of financial and economic systems controlled by the West, will be synonymous with a break of relations - said Ławrow.

Both chambers of the American Congress have recently prepared projects of a wide catalog of sanctions, includingagainst the main Russian financial institutions and the mining industry, as well as the Nord Stream 2. Gas Pipeline. In the currently proposed form, these sanctions would be adopted after the US President found that there was a resumed aggression against Ukraine.President Joe Biden said on Tuesday that he was considering imposing direct sanctions on President Vladimir Putin in the case of Russian invasion of Ukraine.

Author/author: ft \ mtom

Source: Reuters, PAP