It is much easier to introduce tanks to Ukraine than to maintain them later and effectively occupy the Ukrainian state - said Dr. Adam Eberhardt from the Center for Eastern Studies in an interview with TVN24.In his opinion, "a full -scale invasion of an attack on Kiev or Eastern Ukraine is less likely at this stage."Eberhardt expects the Kremlin to take further actions in the near future to increase the uncertainty of Ukrainians and the international community.

For weeks, Russian troops have been concentrated at the border with Ukraine.On Friday, US national security advisor Jake Sullivan said that there is a significant risk, that the attack will take place before the end of the Olympic Games in Beijing.Sullivan emphasized that American intelligence has no information on whether Russian President Vladimir Putin has already decided to resume aggression against Ukraine.

Russia-Ukraine conflict.How can the crisis develop?

- At this stage - and it will last for some time - we will be dealing with an increasing hybrid pressure, aimed at increasing uncertainty in Ukraine, to tighten the social and economic situation, lead to an increase in fear, to force a universal path.Concessions, also from the West - said on TVN24 Dr. Adam Eberhardt, director of the Eastern Studies Center.

The analyst emphasized, however, that so far such action "does not really pretend to be the Russian website, because the reaction of the West is unexpectedly firm and consistent".

Russian troops near Ukraine PAP

Military actions - said Eberhardt - they are possible, but it is difficult to say in what time perspective.- Both less likely land invasion of Ukraine and a more likely non -contact war, i.e. perhaps rocket or aviation attacks on critical infrastructure - he assessed.

According to the expert, a large -scale invasion "is possible when it comes to technical issues."- Russia gathered the armed forces.For Vladimir Putin, with his rationality, regaining control over Ukraine is a priority - he pointed out.

The interlocutor of TVN24 pointed out, however, that "excessively offensive actions, land invasion, carries huge risks for Russia associated with the reaction of Ukrainian society, the reaction of the international community."- Much easier to introduce tanks to Ukraine than to maintain them later and effectively occupy the Ukrainian state.That is why the scenario of the full -scale invasion related to the attack on Kiev or eastern Ukraine is less likely at this stage.What I would expect above all is political and hybrid pressure, and at this stage of the introduction of Ukraine's energy blockade - he said.

- It is in the Russian interest to maintain uncertainty, there is a dialogue with the West, even if it does not really give results.A gradual increase in tension and increasing pressure from a Russian point of view is the safest action - he said.

Russia "surprised by the position of the West"

The guest of TVN24 was asked if the threat of Western economic sanctions on Russia impressed Putin.- I think he does.The Russians talk at all, signal that they want to talk despite the fact that the offer that came from the West is absolutely unsatisfactory for them.I think they were surprised by the coherent position of the West when it comes to the preparation of sanctions, when it comes to military help transferred to Ukraine when it comes to the metastasis of American forces to Europe - he commented.

Adam Eberhardt on the possible development of the crisis in Ukraine TVN24

In his opinion, the fact that Russia continues dialogue, "it can be a signal that it will be a game of exhaustion, that it will be a game of graded escalation, gradual fueling of anxiety, dissatisfaction in Ukraine, destabilizing Ukraine politically, tiring, and exhausting the West.""From Putin's point of view, it is an optimal scenario at this stage," he said.

Author/author: ft \ mtom