Several thousand Ukrainians rallied in Kyiv on Saturday to show unity amid fears of a Russian invasion, as Ukraine’s leader told people not to panic and pushed back against what he said was a glut of bleak war predictions being reported in the media.

Tension has mounted as Russia has built up more than 100,000 troops near Ukraine and carried out large-scale exercises. The US said on Friday an invasion could start at any moment. Russia denies planning to invade.

Ukrainians filed through the centre of Kyiv in a column, chanting “Glory to Ukraine” and carrying Ukrainian flags and banners that said “Ukrainians will resist” and “Invaders must die”.

The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, who attended police drills in southern Kherson region, said a Russian attack could happen at any time, but pushed back against what he called excessive amounts of information about a major looming war.

It came amid reports that an invasion could happen as soon as Wednesday.

“The best friend of our enemies is panic in our country. And all this information is just provoking panic and can’t help us,” he said. “I can’t agree or disagree with what hasn’t happened yet. So far, there is no full-scale war in Ukraine.”

1:02 Panic is our enemy's best friend, says Ukraine president – video

The US and numerous western governments have urged their citizens to leave Ukraine, and Washington said on Saturday it was ordering most of its Kyiv embassy staff to leave.

“We have to be ready each day. It did not begin yesterday. It began in 2014, so, we are ready and this is why we are here,” Zelenskiy said in a reference to Russia’s annexation of Crimea and backing for an anti-Kyiv separatist insurgency in the east.

Zelenskiy voiced frustrations last month with dire assessments of a potential war. Such warnings have taken their toll on Ukraine’s economy, piling pressure on the national currency.

The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, accused the US of seeking to provoke a conflict in Ukraine during a call with his US counterpart, Antony Blinken, the Russian foreign ministry said.

Lavrov said that “the propaganda campaign unleashed by the United States and its allies concerning ‘Russian aggression’ against Ukraine pursues provocative goals”, the Russian foreign ministry reported.

Lavrov and Blinken spoke by phone as the US president, Joe Biden, and the French president, Emmanuel Macron, prepared to sound out the Russian leader, Vladimir Putin, later on Saturday after Washington warned that an all-out invasion could begin “any day”.

During weeks of tensions, Russia has surrounded its western neighbour with more than 100,000 troops. Moscow demands binding security guarantees from the west that include a pledge to roll Nato forces out of eastern Europe and to never expand into Ukraine.

Washington has flatly rejected the demands while offering to discuss a new European disarmament agreement with Moscow.

On Saturday, Lavrov reiterated that the west had ignored “key” Moscow demands, the Russian foreign ministry said.

“It was emphasised that these issues will be at the centre of our assessment of the documents received from the US and Nato,” the ministry added.