"Despite Russia's efforts to divide us, I can confirm that this did not happen," Joe Biden emphasized after meeting other leaders of NATO countries and the European Union.- Over the past few days, we have seen reports regarding the violation of fire suspension by fighters in Donbas - noted the US president.He mentioned, among othersAbout firing the kindergarten that occurred on Thursday.

ADVERTISEMENT

Biden emphasized that there is no evidence that Ukraine is preparing for the offensive in Donbas.He added that Russian reports in this matter "deny logic".The president talked about the Russians' false justification "by the Russians.

See the video. Do we have time to continuous tensions on the Russia -rest world?Gen. Pacek explains

Crisis around Ukraine.Joe Biden: I am convinced that Putin has already made a decision

"Russian soldiers have circled Ukraine at the moment," he said.Biden said that it is possible to attack Russian forces "during the coming days".- We believe that their goal is Kiev, where 2.8 million innocent people live.We clearly say what Russian plans are, because we want to prevent further Russian steps - he emphasized.- The United States, our allies and partners will provide further support for the Ukrainian people.We are ready to impose serious sanctions if it invades Ukraine.I want to say that Russia can still choose the path of diplomacy - he added.

Biden reminded that the meeting of Antony Blinken with Sergei Ławrowie is planned for February 24.- If Russia undertakes military actions before this date, it will slam the door to the diplomatic road.This would mean that they chose a war and they would pay a price for it - he assured.

The US president was asked at the conference whether according to his information, Vladimir Putin had already made the decision of the invasion of Ukraine.- I am convinced that he has already made the decision.We have reason to think so - he replied.He emphasized that the US intelligence data is supported by this.

Munich Safety Conference

US Secretary of State Antony Blinken said on Friday at the Munich Safety Conference that Russia is still looking for an excuse to initiate an armed conflict with Ukraine.The head of American diplomacy argued that Russia's actions on the border with Ukraine exhaust the features of deliberate escalation."Everything we are observing now is part of the script that has been undergoing for weeks, i.e. creating false provocations, then appearances of the need to respond and finally to make an act of aggression to Ukraine," Blinken said.

During the conference in Munich today, the head of the German Ministry of Foreign Affairs Annalej Baerbock pointed out that President Vladimir Putin consciously strengthens Russian-Ukrainian reluctance and transfers her from politics to the emotions of citizens.- Russia is still gathering troops on the border with Ukraine, expressing unacceptable threats against Kiev, as well as to all of us.We are not dealing with a Russian-Ukrainian crisis.He is only Russian - she emphasized.

The Munich Safety Conference, during which about thirty leaders of the state discusses the challenges for the Euro -Atlantic security, will last until Sunday.For the first time in 30 years, representatives of the Russian authorities do not participate.