Since the beginning of the invasion of Vladimir Putin, the statements of Pope Francis arouse great emotions.In mid -September, during a meeting with the Jesuits in Kazakhstan, the pope decided to explain some of them.- From the first day of the war I have been constantly talking about this conflict, referring to the suffering of Ukraine - Franciszek's words "La Civilta Cattolica" cited in the October issue, which is already available on the internet.

ADVERTISEMENT

You can find more information from the world and country on the main page of the Gazeta.pl portal.

See Video Gowin: I hope that the position of the Holy See on war in Ukraine will change

Pope Francis about the war in Ukraine.She calls her barbaric, repulsive, senseless ...

The Jesuit letter published a record of the conversation of Pope Francis with the clergy entitled "Free hearts from hatred."- I am not interested in defending the pope, but that the people feel treated with tenderness by you who are his brothers.The Pope is not angry if he is misunderstood - he told the clergy.

- When the Ukrainian Catholic bishop arrived with a visit, I handed him a file with my statements on this subject.I defined the invasion of Ukraine as unacceptable aggression, repulsive, senseless, barbaric, and sacrilegial.Read my statements.They are collected by a press office (Vatican) - said Franciszek.

The Pope explains his speech about Dugin's daughter

The Pope also explained the statement about the death of Daria Dugina, journalist and journalist, daughter of the main ideologist of Kremlin Aleksander Dugin, whose views she shared.Francis called her "poor girl" and "innocent victim of war."The woman died in August during the assassination of the car, which her father was originally driven.

- After I was talking about Ukraine, I thought that I would say words about the suffering of two nations, Ukrainian and Russian;Because in war this nation suffers, people.The price is paid by poor people as always.And it causes hatred - he explained.

- Whoever wages war, forgets about humanity and does not look at the specific lives of people, but puts on everything the interests of one side and power.Ordinary people in every conflict are real victims who pay for the madness of war.And then I did a reference to this girl blown up.At this point, everything I was talking about was forgotten at that time and only this reference was noted - said Franciszek, adding that he understood people's reactions because they suffer very much.

Pope's visit to the Russian embassy

Francis also told the Jesuits about his visit to the Russian embassy at the Holy See just after the outbreak of the war: - I told the ambassador that I would like to talk to President Putin if he left me a small dialogue window - he revealed.

The Pope, hosting the Russian embassy, bypassed protocols and conventions.Normally, the head of the church accepts politicians and diplomats, not the other way around.