But Mr Heappey told BBC Radio 4's Today programme it was Ukraine that makes the decisions of where and what to target, rather than the countries or companies that manufacture and export the weapons.

Mr Heappey added: "It is entirely legitimate to go after targets in the depth of your opponents to disrupt their logistics and supply lines."

He added that it was also a legitimate part of war for Russian forces to be striking targets in western Ukraine to disrupt Ukrainian supply lines, as long as they avoided targeting civilians - "which unfortunately they have not taken much regard for so far".

UK defence sources later sought to clarify Mr Heappey's remarks, who also told Times Radio it was "not necessarily a problem" for British-supplied arms to be used by Ukrainian forces against military targets in Russia, after acknowledging that weapons now being supplied have the range to be used over borders.

The sources said the UK was not involved in Ukrainian targeting, and the minister's use of the phrase "deep strike precision targeting" referred to stopping the relentless bombardment of Russian artillery, not striking targets in Russia.

"The UK and many other Western allies are now providing longer-range weapon systems to help counter the indiscriminate artillery fire that the Russian armed forces have been raining down on besieged Ukrainian cities," the sources told the BBC.

"Targeting is a matter for Ukraine, but the UK expects all parties in this conflict to decide on their military targets in full compliance with the laws of armed conflict."

Later, Prime Minister Boris Johnson was asked in a Talk TV interview if he was happy for British weapons to be used against targets like oil refineries within Russia - and he replied that Ukraine had a right to defend itself.

"We don't want the crisis to escalate beyond Ukraine's borders," he said.

"But the Ukrainians, plainly, as James [Heappey] has said, they have a right to defend themselves. They're being attacked from within Russian territory... they have a right to protect and defend themselves".