On Saturday, during the Munich Safety Conference, the President of Ukraine Wołodymyr Zelnski will take the floor.The politician will talk, among others, with the prime minister of Great Britain Boris Johnson, German Chancellor Olafrem Scholz and the American Vice President Kamala Harris.

ADVERTISEMENT

The main topics of the conference include the deepening crisis to the Russian-Ukrainian border and the aggressive actions of Moscow.Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki will also take the floor among today's panelists of the conference in Munich.

You can read more latest information on Gazeta.pl.

See the video. Do we have time to continuous tensions on the Russia -rest world?Gen. Pacek explains

Scholz: Russia made the issue of possible membership of Ukraine in NATO Casus Bella

The conference was started by German Chancellor Olaf Scholz.- Russia made the issue of possible membership of Ukraine in NATO Casus Bella, which is a paradox because the decision is not planned in this matter - said Scholz.He noted, however, that the West is ready to negotiate on Russian security demands, but "not being naive".

The latest reports about the situation in Ukraine can be followed in live coverage HERE.

- There is no justification for the assembly 100,000soldiers at the borders of Ukraine - the chancellor emphasized.In his opinion, Russia's military aggression against Ukraine will be a "serious mistake with significant political, economic and geostrategic costs for her."

Kamala Harris: A commitment to art.5 NATO is holy.The US supports them

The US Vice President during her speech at the beginning thanked the European leaders for their commitment in a situation in Ukraine.- The borders of states should not be changed by force.Russia pretends to be innocent.He creates false pretexts for invasion.We see that he gathers strength before our eyes.Disinformation, lies and propaganda spread - she said.

- obligation to art.5 NATO is holy.The US supports them - the politician added.

As she emphasized, although Russia claims that it is ready to talk, it narrows their path."Russia's actions contradict her words," she said.- If Russia continues to run the invasion of Ukraine, then the US with partners will impose significant and unprecedented economic costs on this country - she noted.

Harris announced financial sanctions and control of Russia's exports.She emphasized that they would also hit those who support the Kremlin invasion.Finally, Kamala Harris marked US support for NATO's eastern flank.

Stoltenberg: The numbers of Russian troops at the border are being expanded

NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg said during the Munich Safety Conference that he sent a message to the head of the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs Sergei Ławrowa with an appeal that Russia would get involved in Dialog with the Council of NATO.Stoltenberg also confirmed once again that the risk of conflict is still real.

"There are no signs of the withdrawal of Russian troops, their numbers at the border with Ukraine are being expanded," said Jens Stoltenberg.

Ursula von der Leyen: The EU cannot rely on gas supplies from a country that threatens war

In her speech, the head of the EC warned Moscow that her thinking from the "dark past" could cost Russia a prosperous future.- The world has been looking at the greatest concentration of troops on European land since the darkest days of the Cold War - said the head of the EC at the Munich Security Conference.She added that the Kremlin is trying to undermine the entire security structure in Europe.

Ursula von der Leyen emphasized that the European Union cannot depend to such a large extent on gas supplies on a country that threatens to unleash the war on the continent.She repeated that if Russia began the invasion, she would suffer serious consequences.

"The threat from Russia towards Ukraine can change all international order," she said.