Appeals of German leaders to Vladimir Putin."The Ukrainian nation has the right to live without fear and threats," said Frank -Walter Steinmeier after Sunday's election for the president of Germany.- I appeal to President Putin: please solve the loop around Ukraine's neck - he added.Chancellor Olaf Scholz also appealed to Russia for de -escalation of tension.The head of the German government on Monday is to visit Kiev, the next day he will go to Moscow.

Frank-Walter Steinmeier in a speech delivered before the Federal Assembly, after choosing him as president of Germany, warned against the growing threat of war in Europe."My joy would be greater if the Federal Assembly did not fall for peace for peace in Europe," said Steinmeier after the vote, which provided him with re -election.

Frank-Walter Steinmeier about the concentration of Russian troops

- We are in the middle of the armed conflict, war in Eastern Europe - he said, pointing out that "Russia is responsible for this.""It is impossible to misunderstand the distribution of Russian troops (at the borders of Ukraine - ed.) - said Steinmeier.

In his opinion, the concentration of Russian troops "is a threat to Ukraine", and the Ukrainian nation "has the right to live without fear and threats, self -determination and sovereignty."- Everyone who tries to destroy it, "we will answer firmly - said. The President of Germany turned to the President of Russia Vladimir Putin. - I appeal to President Putin: Please solve the loop around Ukraine.- Steinmeier said.

Scholz announces "hard reactions and sanctions" in the event of the invasion

Olaf Scholz also referred to the situation in Ukraine on Sunday.He said that the potential conflict between Russia and Ukraine is "a very, very serious threat to peace in Europe."He announced "hard reactions and sanctions" in the case of Russian aggression to Ukraine.

- These repercussions have been carefully prepared and will be immediately implemented with our allies in Europe and NATO - assured Scholz in Berlin.

Conversation formats

On Monday, the German Chancellor will go to Ukraine for talks with the president of this country Volodymyr Zelnski, and then on Tuesday to Russia, where he plans to meet President Vladimir Putin - DPA agency said."In both cases, it's about thinking about how we can provide peace in Europe," said Scholz.

"You need to use various international conversation formats to find a way out of the crisis," said the head of the German government, adding that "Ukraine may be sure that we will show the necessary solidarity, as in the past."He emphasized that the Germans supported Ukraine with economic assistance most of all countries, "and they will continue to do it".

127,000 soldiers

In recent days there has been an escalation of the crisis related to the accumulation of Russian troops at the border with Ukraine.According to western interview estimates, the number of concentrated soldiers reaches 127,000.

Ukraine and the rule of Western countries believe that this is to be used to put pressure on Kiev and the capitals supporting it.Experts and Western countries talk about the growing threat of Russian aggression on this state.

PAP

Author/author: TAS, MJZ // RZW