"The Germans did not settle accounts for us from World War II," Jarosław Kaczyński said at a meeting with the inhabitants of Sochaczew.The PiS president also added that maybe now is the best time to demand these compensation.According to opposition politicians, the topic of reparations returns when PiS has a crisis and tries to find an enemy.

Law and justice politicians, including the President of the Party Jarosław Kaczyński, are just starting a new detour around the country.Such party mobilization has - as they say - help in creating a program for next year's elections.- People, as you can see, react enthusiastically - said after the meeting in Sochaczew PiS vice -meter Radosław Fogiel.

In Sochaczew, enthusiasm was trained.Before Jarosław Kaczyński's speech, the participants of the meeting practiced cries in honor of the PiS president.Sylwester Kaczmarek, chairman of the Sochaczew City Council, instructed the residents from the stage."We have to really chad here to remember us," he said.

Party conventions are always directed to some extent, and the shouts are carefully planned, but it was supposed to be a meeting with voters, and even for voters protesting in front of the building there was not enough.

After the salvos of applause and shouts, Jarosław Kaczyński could start his speech.In the context of Russian aggression in Ukraine, the PiS president said: We must do everything to avoid war with us.

- In this way to be very difficult to attack, we just have to arm ourselves - said Kaczyński.

Then the German thread appeared in the speech.- Anyway, when we said that we would be seriously armed, the Germans said they too.So this mechanism was launched.Whether Germans want to arm against Russia or against us, I don't know, but in any case armor - said PiS president.

The opposition asks if it was to be an unfortunate joke, and adds that the deputy prime minister for security seems to suggest that our neighbor, our partner from the European Union and NATO armor against Poland.

- Either he does it cynically to arouse more anti -German moods, or just out of stupidity.I don't know what is worse - says Borys Budka, MP of Platforma Obywatelska.- Calling artificial phobias and looking for an enemy where he is not there - adds Dariusz Klimczak, MP of the Polish People's Party.

Searching for an enemy?

- The enemy is in the east - says the opposition, and looking for it at the moment behind our western border is unreasonable, because the German army is a serious element in a NATO puzzle.

- If there were a potential - which threatens us, because it can happen - Russia's aggression on Poland, it is this German component that should, as part of the North Atlantic Alliance, fight with us with the invader - notes Marek Biernacki, MP of the Polish -PSL coalition..

However, PiS politicians are of a different opinion.

- Maybe I am allergic, but when I hear about the fact that the Germans are starting to arm, I do not feel comfortable - said Law and Justice MP Marek Suski in an interview with Radio Plus, noting that the Germans have already attacked Poland once.

The topic of war reparations

Jarosław Kaczyński during the speech in Sochaczew also raised the topic of war reparations from Germany.- They did not settle accounts for us from World War II - said the deputy prime minister.

In addition, the PiS president said that now there is a good opportunity to apply to Berlin for reparations.- There is something like timing in politics, the moment when you have to perform with some demands, this right moment is probably approaching, that you have to chop your fist on the table - said Kaczyński.

Opposition politicians remind, however, that the PiS president promised reparations seven years ago.Even the Sejm team and the Government Institute of War Loss were created.Half a year ago we heard that estimation of losses is "at the finish".

Now MP Marek Suski says that the team's work "has been completed".- Today we can say, a report.At this point, you will have to use this report.I think it is closer than further - the politician added.

The topic of reparations is not the first for PiS.- This topic always comes back.When Law and Justice has a crisis, he tries to find an enemy - says Marek Biernacki from the Polish -PSL coalition.

The opposition emphasizes that diplomatic relations with Germany, especially in the situation of conflict in Ukraine, must be particularly constructive.

- Of course, you can have reservations about many matters related to how Germany pursue their energy policy, how their policy against Ukraine pursues, but you cannot lead to conflicts between us and Germany - believes Magdalena Biejat, a left of the left.

In the talks of Warsaw with the new German government, the topic of reparations appeared, but there was no official conclusion so far.

Author: Maria Bilińska / Source: Facts in the afternoon TVN24