See the video before Boris Johnson took up politics, he invented fake news

As a minister of foreign affairs of Great Britain, Liz Truss has repeatedly spoken about Russian aggression.A few weeks ago, she announced that if she became the head of the British government, she would be the "greatest friend" of Ukraine.- As the prime minister I will - like Boris Johnson - the greatest friend of Ukraine and I will completely devote myself to actions that will cause Putin to suffer defeat in Ukraine, and Russia will mean less - she said in July.

ADVERTISEMENT

- This conflict is currently aligned, and now there is no time to talk about concessions and compromises towards the terrifying dictator (...).I am a candidate whom the British can trust in the matter of Ukraine and on our freedom - she added, a politician cited by Sky News.

"We need to degrade the potential of the Russian war machine"

Earlier, Liz Truss emphasized that the world could not give up sanctions against Russia, because it cannot allow Vladimir Putin to blackmail him.She noted that sanctions must withdraw the Russian economy to the Soviet times.- We need to degrade the potential of the Russian war machine by increasing sanctions.(...) Losing Ukraine in this war will really threaten the security of everyone in Europe - she said.

The British Minister of Foreign Affairs also assured that London would deliver "all equipment that she would need to displace the Russians" and urged that every "partner of Ukraine" would do the same.- If we do not stop Putin in Ukraine, it will be a threat to others: Baltic countries, Poland, Moldova and this may end in a conflict with NATO - she noted.

The politician has repeatedly condemned war crimes committed by Russian soldiers in Ukraine, includingslaughter in Bucza, and also drew attention to the need to investigate and pull the perpetrators responsible.

Liz Truss also announced that if necessary she would be ready to use the Arsenal of Great Britain if she were at the forefront of the government.

"Poland has always clearly seen Putin's intentions"

In April, after meeting with the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Zbigniew Rau, the head of British diplomacy emphasized that "Poland has always clearly seen the issue of Russia and Putin's intentions."She also thanked Poles for helping Ukrainian refugees.- At this time, the ruined European security we are very, very grateful for what Poland did - she said.

- You were on the first line of help of Ukraine, supporting those who escaped from this terrifying war.You stood unmoved on the side of the Ukrainian nation and at every opportunity you called for sharper actions against Putin - she added.

At that time, Liz Truss also talked about the need to strengthen the NATO eastern flank.

More messages on Gazeta.pl's main page

Boris Johnson's resignation in an atmosphere of a scandal

Boris Johnson's government began to fall apart after the media revealed the matter of the moral scandal.It's about the promotion of Chris Pincher.Although there was allegations of sexual harassment on the conservative party member, the prime minister appointed him to the position of deputy Whipa, i.e. the person responsible for discipline at the parliamentary club.The matter was worsened by unreliable and, as everything indicates, false explanations, which the spokesman for the last few days was made.He insisted that Johnson did not know anything.

The scandal caused an avalanche to leave the Great Britain's government.Within two days, nearly 60 officials and colleagues of the prime minister left him - which is a record result.The first to resign by the Minister of Finance Rishi Sunak and Minister of Health Sajid Javid.British Minister for Northern Ireland Brandon Lewis resigned the last to resign."It is clear that our party, colleagues in parliament, volunteers and the whole country deserve more" - wrote a politician in a resignation letter.Honesty, ethics, mutual respect - according to the former minister - the administration of Boris Johnson did not represent these values."I defended this government, both privately and in public. However, we are already at a point from which there is no retreat," Lewis added.

Ultimately, Boris Johnson resigned on July 7.