A look at the German -led NATO base near Ukraine .. What are the reinforcements they do?

Russia may use one of its most terrifying weapons against America and Ukraine

Atlanta, United States (CNN)- The United States has seen indicators that Russia has placed blood supplies near the borders of Ukraine, according to a senior US official at the Ministry of Defense, as part of its accumulation of medical supplies, forces and military equipment in the region that US officials said may indicate plansInvade.

Reuters was the first to report Russia's transfer of blood supplies to the border with Ukraine, which would be necessary to treat victims in a state of conflict.The development added that the United States fears that Russia has the capabilities to launch an attack in a very short time.

CNN reported last month that Russia has begun to establish supply lines such as medical units and fuel that could continue in a long -term conflict if Moscow chooses the invasion.

Ukraine denied the transfer of any blood supply to the front lines.On Saturday, the Ukrainian Deputy Minister of Defense, Hanna Mali, described reports as "incorrect".

"This information is incorrect. Such news is an element of information and psychological warfare. The purpose of this information is to spread panic and fear in our society."

However, the White House believes that Ukraine reduces the importance of the threat in a way that may lead to a lack of preparedness for a possible Russian attack.

"We understand the difficult situation that the Ukrainian president faces Zeilinsky and the pressure he is exposed to. But at the same time it reduces the risks of invasion, he asks hundreds of millions of dollars in the form of weapons to defend against one of them. We believe it is important to beOpen and frank about this threat. "

CNN reported on Friday that tension may escalate between Zeilinsky and Den Administration officials, amid a dispute over how to explain and publish American intelligence assessments that say Russia may be preparing for a large -scale attack on Ukraine.

Biden's spokesman also warned that the administration believes that the war is "imminent", Zilinski told reporters on Friday: "There is a feeling abroad to have a war here. This is not the case."

CNN contacted Russia to respond.