During the Teleconference in Washington, representatives of the White House stated that the Kremlin's declarations about the withdrawal of some of the troops gathered around Ukraine are not in reality.It was also reported that Russia can carry out operations to be an excuse for invasion.

ADVERTISEMENT

- We are confirmed that in recent days Russia has increased the number of its troops along the Ukrainian border by seven thousand soldiers - said the Reuters agency a high -ranking representative of the American administration.

You can read more latest information on Gazeta.pl.

See the video Is we threatened with an open conflict between Russia and Ukraine?Zalewski: I think no

The clerk added that although Moscow publicly declares his desire to de -esquate and readiness for diplomatic actions, in fact he still expands his forces at the border with Ukraine.

Estonia: The attack on Ukraine would include rocket shelling and occupation

Information about the next seven thousand Russian soldiers on the border with Ukraine was also confirmed by Estonia's intelligence.As Mikk Marran, director of the Estonian Foreign Intelligence Service, said on Wednesday, 10 battle groups are approaching the border with Ukraine.According to Estonian services, a total of about 170,000 soldiers were already arranged there.

- Russia will probably carry out a limited military attack on this country - said the head of the Estonian intelligence.In his opinion, the attack on Ukraine could include rocket fire and occupation.

- Another possibility may be the intensification of the fight against government forces on the border with two separatist regions supported by Russia in eastern Ukraine.Such escalation is very likely.In this way, Russia would probably get a reliable possibility of denying (aggression) and avoid sanctions - added Marran.

Yesterday, President Joe Biden talked about the situation around Ukraine by phone with chancellor Olaf Scholz.

In Brussels, the extraordinary EU peak of the threat of another Russian invasion of Ukraine

In Brussels at 12.30 there will be an extraordinary peak with the participation of EU leaders regarding the threat of another Russian invasion of Ukraine.The leaders of 27 countries were planning to arrive in Brussels to the EU-African peak, which begins after 14.00.So it was decided that earlier, during an hourly meeting, they would summarize preparations for a joint answer if Russia attacks Ukraine again.

It is an extraordinary, informal peak, so there will be no traditional conclusions from the meeting.However, there may be a joint statement of 27.The Union's position on what is happening in the east is unambiguous.

- Russia undertook unprecedented escalation towards Ukraine.The surroundings of this country with troops on an unprecedented scale can only be seen as an aggressive action.This escalation is a threat to peace and security in Europe.It is also a threat to an international system based on principles - said the chairman of the European Council Charles Michel yesterday in the European Parliament.He emphasized that the Union still hopes for a diplomatic solution to the crisis.

If the conversations fail and occur in the invasion, then the Union will impose strict sanctions and it will not be only - as the chairwoman of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen said - diplomatic restrictions involving the freezing of assets.

- In Russia's strategic interest, it is to diversify its unilateral economy and catch up.She needs technologies in which we are world leaders.Russia is almost completely dependent on us when it comes to advanced components.Our sanctions can therefore be very severe - said the head of the committee.

The European Union has prepared a package of sanctions in cooperation with the United States, Great Britain and Canada.