MINSK, 20 June (BelTA) – A total war against Belarus and Russia is in progress and the future of the two countries is at stake. Deputy Chairman of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Union State of Belarus and Russia, Chairman of the International Affairs Commission of the House of Representatives of the National Assembly of Belarus Andrei Savinykh made the statement at the 62nd session of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Union State of Belarus and Russia, BelTA has learned.

Andrei Savinykh said: “Today the world is going through large-scale transformations of comprehensive nature. The destruction of the familiar world order is accompanied by a fierce fight for the redivision of spheres of influence. Belarus and Russia have already become objects of military threats, economic sanctions designed to destroy our economies, and an information war with absolutely unprecedented underhandedness and cynicism.”

It is necessary to understand that we are not involved in a conflict of interests, the MP noted. “A total war is in progress against us where the future of our states, sovereignty, and wellbeing of our nations are at stake,” he stressed.

Andrei Savinykh went on saying: “This is why on the basis of analysis of key political and economic processes one can identify a number of priority avenues of counteraction. We have to intensify efforts to create the common economic space in accordance with the approved Union State programs. The formation of the united transport, electricity, and energy market, the introduction of a unified mechanism for keeping records of Union State property and many other things are measures of critical importance, which are geared towards the progressive development of our countries.”

A session of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Union State of Belarus and Russia is in progress in Minsk today. Participants of the session are expected to discuss topical aspects of work of Union State MPs in counteracting external challenges and threats, the sanctions-fuelled pressure, Nazism propaganda, and in ensuring the protection of historical memory. Compositions of newly established commissions of the Parliamentary Assembly will be approved and heads of the commissions will be elected.

Apart from that, plans have been made to entrust the commissions with providing legal support for the execution of the Union State programs, which were passed by Union State Supreme State Council Ordinance No.6 “On the main directions of realization of the Union State Foundation Treaty provisions in 2021-2023” on 4 November 2021.