The theme of the day in Ukraine was explosions in the Russian military base in the western part of Crimea today

The Chechen leader Ramzan Kadyrov also spoke, who stated that "for us only there is a victory"

In turn, the Advisor of President Zelanski claims that Russia is currently striving to freeze the war

You can track information about the defense of Ukraine around the clock in our live coverage

More important information can be found on the Onet's main page.If you don't want to miss any important messages - sign up for our newsletter

A dozen or so explosions occurred today in the Russian Military Base of Nowefedorowka, located in the western part of Crimea occupied by Russia.According to Reuters, witnesses heard loud explosions.On the recordings of the scene you can see clouds of smoke floating above the Russian base.For now, the reasons for the explosion are unknown.The Russian media announced that at least one person was killed.

Behind the outbreaks in the Russian military base is the Ukrainian army, which in this operation only used Ukrainian equipment - the New York Times said on Tuesday, citing an anonymous source in the Ukrainian army.Neither the Russians nor the Ukrainians officially confirm these reports.Both sides have already issued official messages on this matter.

Kadyrov is threatening

The leader of the Chechen fighters Ramzan Kadyrov once again through social media spoke about the Russian invasion of Ukraine.His soldiers are distinguished by special cruelty during the ongoing war.

"For us, there is only victory to accept and none of the Nazis can take it away from us," Kadrir wrote on Telegram.He added that the "Achmat" special units and the folk militia of the Lugansk People's Republic took the territory of the Knauf factory in the Donetsk region.

"Russia wants to take a break"

Russia is currently striving to freeze war.All this in order to regroup and prepare for a re -impact - said Mychajło Podolak, adviser to the President of Ukraine Volodymyr Zelanski in an interview with the German daily "Tagesspiegel".He also appealed to Germany for help in providing weapons.

Russia launched Kindżały

Until now, the Russians fired with these rockets only the most important goals for them.They also used them in a Sunday rocket attack on the Winnicki circuit-said the command of Ukraine's air force, writing about the CH-47M Kindżał, i.e. the most modern Russian shells.

Will there be a nuclear weapon inspection of Russia?

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Russia has announced that it would not allow the US to inspect its nuclear weapon as part of the New Start nuclear reducing Treaty.This decision is related to sanctions that prevent the Russian side of analogous inspections in the US - the Russian ministry said on Monday.

The conditions of the inspection proposed by Washington "de facto de facto the Russian Federation right to inspection on American territory" because Russian experts and crew members of their aircraft would have problems obtaining American visas in connection with sanctions imposed on Moscow due to the Ukrainian conflict - says the Foreign Ministry, the ForeignHe emphasizes, however, that Russia recognizes that it is fully obliged to follow the treaty.

When is the peace in Ukraine?

- Ukrainians should be patient and prepare for many years of war with Russia, which may take a year or two, but maybe also for example 10 years;Relations with Moscow will only change when the transformation occurs in three consecutive generations of Russians - said Ukrainian military expert Petro Czernyk in an interview with the portal Tsn.ua.

According to Czerniek, the situation will not change the possible death of Vladimir Putin.The mentality of Russia's inhabitants is of key importance, and rapid transformations should not be expected in this matter.On the contrary - in the case of the Kremlin unfavorable for the Kremlin and, for example, the disintegration of the Russian state, you have to reckon with the fact that "peace from a neighbor" will only be obtained in about 60 years.

Thank you for being with us.Sign up for Onet's newsletter to receive the most valuable content from us.