"Poland joins Finland, Estonia, Latvia and Denmark in the right matter of introducing a general European ban on issuing tourist visas for Russians," Andrij Jermak, head of the office of the President of Ukraine, Wołodymyr Zelanski, wrote on Twitter on Twitter."Congratulations, Russia. A visa ban is coming," he added.

ADVERTISEMENT

In an interview with PAP, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Piotr Wawrzyk confirmed that Poland supports the extension of EU sanctions, especially when it comes to suspension of the visa traffic contract for citizens of the Russian Federation - says the portal Belsat.eu.

As he noted, all European Union countries are not consent.Against such a decision are, among othersGermany, France and the Netherlands.He added that Poland is trying to develop its own solution.

You can read more latest information on Gazeta.pl.

According to information provided by the Polish press agency, Polish diplomacy has been talking about this subject for several weeks with some Member States.Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia as well as the Czech Republic and Slovakia would probably join the initiative.

See the video Is there a risk of using nuclear weapons by the Russians?Siemoniak: The risk is very small

Mychajło Podolak: Limiting the right to enter the Russians to European countries can make them aware of their responsibility for the invasion

Advisor of the President of Ukraine Michajło Podolak stated that limiting the right to enter the Russians to European countries can make them aware of their responsibility for invasion of a neighbor.As he wrote on Twitter, "six months of war proved that they were not celebrated by mass murders, destroyed cities, nuclear blackmail, bucz or mariupol."

According to Mychajło Podolak, not to bring Russian citizens visas to the Schengen zone, he can even push them into rebellion.Estonia introduced such restrictions the first.Tallinn announced that from next week he would not let in Russians, visiting Schengen issued by Estonia.At the same time, he will continue to respect documents issued by other countries.Finland also performed with the intention of limiting traffic from Russia.

In turn, the President of Latvia Egils Levits said that the visit and permission to stay in the European Union should be withdrawn to people who support Russian aggression.The documents that have already been issued should - in his opinion - be re -verified.

In connection with sanctions, air traffic between Europe and Russia has ceased to function.In order to get to other European countries, Russia's citizens must cross the land border, and then continue to travel, among othersswitching to a plane in Riga, Tallinn or Helsinki.At the same time, the border with the Baltic States and Finland can be crossed by visas issued by other countries in the Schengen zone.