The leader of China during a conversation with Vladimir Putin was to once again ensure his support for Moscow regarding "sovereignty and security" matters.XI Jinping does not give up close contacts with Russia despite global opposition to the war in Ukraine - CNN says.The politicians' conversation took place on Wednesday, June 15, on the 69th birthday of the 11th.

ADVERTISEMENT

See the video of Russia and China connects strict partnership on many levels?

Read more information from the country and the world on the main page of Gazeta.pl

China and Russia will develop a partnership

XI was also to announce "deep strategic cooperation" between two countries.After a telephone conversation with the Chinese leader, the Kremlin's official message appeared the terms "deepening the comprehensive partnership".

Wednesday's phone call of politicians was the second official since Putin's attack on Ukraine.The leader of Russia began the war he began, "a special military operation".China also use euphemisms in the narrative of war, and on state television they repeat Moscow's narrative.At the same time, XI declares neutrality, speaking of its country as a guardian of the global economy.

China and Russia combine interests.Both countries want to fight the economic "global hegemon of the United States" - as Chinese propaganda describes.Moscow must find a way to save his own economy in connection with sanctions imposed after her attack on Kiev.Cooperation with China may be crucial in this situation.

"The extension of cooperation in the sphere of energy, finance, industry, transport and others was agreed, taking into account the global economic situation, which became complicated in connection with the unlawful policy of Western sanctions" - announced the Kremlin in the appeal after the conversation of the leaders of both countries, according to Reuters.

China with a "proper solution" for Ukraine

XI claims that China since the beginning of the war "independently assessed the situation of Ukraine."He also called all the parties to promote the "proper conflict solution".In the official announcement of the Kremlin, the words XI have an even stronger overtones: "The President of China drew attention to the legitimacy of Russia's actions to protect the basic national interests in the face of the challenges for its safety created by external forces," the Russians say.

China's reaction to the war in Ukraine further deteriorated Beijing relations with Washington.President Joe Biden was to demand from the China leader condemning aggression to Ukraine.Unsuccessfully.

"China claim that they are neutral, but their behavior shows that they are still involved in close relationships with Russia," said Ned Price, spokesman for the State Department in the statement cited by "The Guardian".Americans say that China - supporting Russia - is now "on the bad side of history".

****

Help Ukraine, join the collection.You will pay the money at pcpm.org.pl/ukraina.