Russia's aggression in Ukraine began as early as 2014.On February 27, unmarked military formations began storming the buildings of the parliament and the autonomous government of the Crimea Republic in Simferopol, after which they hung Russian flags.Vladimir Putin claimed that they were not his soldiers, but local paramilitary groups.Now, on Sunday (March 19), in the "Moscow. Kremlin. Putin" broadcast on Rossija 1, he confessed that his country was not ready for a "special operation", i.e. a full -size invasion of Ukraine.

ADVERTISEMENT

More information can be found on the main page of the Gazeta.pl portal.

VIEW VIDEO Col. Łukasiewicz: The use of nuclear weapons is unlikely

Vladimir Putin: Now and record collections, banks are working, weapons are ...

Vladimir Putin in response to the question of journalist Paweł Zarubin, why Russia in 2014 did not start a "special military operation" [that is, full -size invasion - ed.], Emphasized that the current situation in Ukraine should not be combined with the conflict in Donbas.- As for Donbass, we hoped that we would be able to solve this problem peacefully [thousands of Ukrainians were killed there - ed.].But as it turns out now, we see it, we were simply watched by the nose.Each of our so -calledHe prepared Ukraine for war.And Ukraine undertook two military operations on a large scale using heavy equipment, artillery, aviation - he quotes the hypocritical words of Russian President Ria Novosti.

The dictator at the same time emphasized that Russia in 2014 was not ready for "some more serious actions".Then he mentioned the areas that were strengthened by the Kremlin for eight years.- We now have (...) record collections in agriculture, over 150 million tons of grain, even 155 million tons.(...) Then [in 2014 - ed.] It wasn't like that - said Putin.- The Russian authorities also managed to strengthen import and financial system - he continued.- Despite the predictions of the enemy, nothing collapsed, everything works.And the (banking) cards work, and the financial system works, and banks build their capabilities.What would happen in 2014, it is very difficult to say - said Putin.- In addition, Russia developed its military technology and created a hyperpone weapon over eight years - Putin summed up.

"Green People" annexed Crimea

Russia kept all the time that its soldiers and the Crimea were gone.Ukrainians, ironically, said that the aggressors apparently came from space.They began to call them "green people".

On March 18, 2014, the President of Russia stated that the Crimean Peninsula was joined to Russia.Thus, Vladimir Putin broke the principles, treaties and agreements regarding the sovereignty of states and the integrity of borders that allowed Europe to keep in Europe since World War II.The West and Ukraine found annexation illegal.Over the next days, the Russians announced the creation of two self -proclaimed folk republics: Donetsk and Lugansk.

In January 2023, the European Court of Human Rights confirmed that the Russian troops have been present in eastern Ukraine since April 2014, and their distribution on a large scale began in August 2014.