The archbishop of Canterbury has said an end to the war in Ukraine cannot lead to Russia being treated like Germany after the first world war.

Justin Welby, writing in the Daily Telegraph as Ukraine marks the one-year anniversary of the Russian invasion, also said Kyiv must not be forced into a “Munich agreement-like compromise”, a reference to the doomed settlement that failed to prevent the second world war.

“Provided a just peace between Russia and Ukraine can be achieved, there must be a security structure that makes another war unlikely,” he said. “Russia cannot end up like Germany after 1919; it must be able to recover and be secure without being allowed to repeat its aggression.

“The great powers must find ways, ideally through a conference, to design the conditions for long-term security, as was done in 1945. Today, it must be done for a new century, including UN reform, while the cost of conflict is fading from most European memories.”

The treaty of Versailles, signed in Paris in 1919, was seen as humiliating by many Germans, and some historians argue that it created an enduring bitterness that helped the Nazis rise to power.

But Welby also urged world leaders not to force Ukraine into an “unjust peace”, as he spoke about the impact of visiting Kyiv.

HIs comments came as Rishi Sunak is to urge allies to “move faster” in arming Ukraine, during a meeting of world leaders to mark the invasion anniversary.

Sunak will lead the UK in a minute’s silence at 11am and will meet leaders of G7 nations to discuss the conflict that has scarred Europe and shaken the west.

He is expected to tell the G7 leaders in a virtual meeting: “For Ukraine to win this war – and to accelerate that day – they must gain a decisive advantage on the battlefield. That is what it will take to shift Putin’s mindset. This must be our priority now. Instead of an incremental approach, we need to move faster on artillery, armour, and air defence.

“The coming weeks will be difficult for Ukraine, but they will also be difficult for Russia. They are over-reaching once again. So now is the time to support Ukraine’s plan to re-arm, regroup, and push forward.”

skip past newsletter promotion Sign up to First Edition Free daily newsletter Our morning email breaks down the key stories of the day, telling you what’s happening and why it matters Enter your email address Sign up Privacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy . We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. after newsletter promotion

The UK remains a prominent supporter of Kyiv. The government announced earlier this year that Britain would be the first country to supply tanks to Ukraine’s armed forces.

But fears remain that the war could continue for at least another year, even as Ukraine insists that further support and weaponry can help bring the conflict to a conclusion.