Journalists of the Ukrainian truth portal are looking for Russians in Europe who, despite the armed invasion of Ukraine, restlessly rest in their favorite foreign resorts.This applies to the wife of the deputy defense minister of Russia Timur Ivanov, playing in the French Courchevel.At this time, units commanded by her husband attack Ukrainian cities.How is this possible?The Foundation for the Fight against Corruption of Alexei Navalny claims that the couple made a fictitious divorce and thanks to this Svetlana escapes from the sanctions that fell on Timura.Thus, he has access to great property.

Courchevel has been one of the favorite places of rich Russians for years, in which they spend money and have fun.Even a year after the armed invasion of Ukraine, "dozens, hundreds and thousands of wealthy citizens of the Russian Federation can be found on the streets of the resort" - writes Ukrainian truth.

Svetlana Iwanowa was seen in the Alpine resort on March 8, 2023.The woman played in the company of the Russian singer Wałerija Meładze and did shopping in local boutiques.

At the beginning of Russian aggression, Ivanov did exclusive shopping in Paris.In the summer, the couple divorced, but - according to the Foundation for the Fight of Corruption (FBK) of the famous oppositionist Alexei Navalny - the divorce was fictitious.In autumn, Ivanov was covered by EU sanctions, and his partner did not.

Expand

Millions of dollars for luxurious life

That is why Svetlana can also travel and spend money in the most beautiful corners of the world today, while her husband continues crimes - emphasizes Ukrainian truth.

According to FBK, the marriage spends millions of dollars on luxurious life, the couple has palaces, exclusive cars and many other precious things that are not in line with official income.

"How is it possible and why does the wife of one of the managers of the full -size invasion of Russia to Ukraine so far enjoys life in a civilized world?"- the portal wonders.

The Ukrainian truth also emphasized that this was not the first trip of her journalists to the European Union countries in search of Russians, resting in France, Austria and other countries that the Kremlin calls "hostile".

Meładze did not want to answer journalists' questions

Meładze, whom Ukrainian journalists met in Courchevel, escaped from the camera so as not to answer the question about his attitude towards war."How do you rest in Courchevel while Russia bombards Ukraine?"- asked the singer journalist of the Ukrainian truth Mychajło Tkacz.The artist avoided an answer.He suggested that he would talk to a journalist in private, but the operator did not stop recording them.Son of the musician tried to hide his father, and his wife took him from the place where journalists were.

Batune in Batumi Meładze on the first day of the Russian invasion of Ukraine appealed against the war.Later he continued his performances in Russia.

In Russian public opinion, appeals appeared to deprive him of Russian citizenship after he said "fame Ukraine" at a party in Dubai.Meładze explained that he loved the Russians and Ukrainians, he did not want "hate none of them".

Author/author: TAS/ADSO

Source: PAP, Ukrainian truth