The establishment of real peace in Ukraine is possible only if Kyiv restores control of all the territories occupied by Russia.

"Forcing Ukraine to betray part of her citizenry would not be just, nor would it bring peace. Such "agreements" only lay the foundations of the next conflict. That is why we ask Ukraine's allies to commit fully to a complete Ukrainian victory. This is the only true option," Minister of Foreign Affairs of Lithuania Gabrielius Landsbergis posted on Twitter, an Ukrinform correspondent reports.

He emphasized that “we all want peace in Ukraine, but a lasting peace cannot be based on myths.” With this in mind, the minister debunked several myths about a potential peace deal.

As noted, the first myth is that Ukraine is unable to win back all territory including Crimea. "Reality: Ukrainians have shown repeatedly that they can restore territorial integrity, given the necessary weapons and training. Our support can be decisive. The ball is in our court," the minister wrote.

According to him, the second myth claims that Russia is unbeatable. "Reality: Ukraine’s allies have only committed a tiny fraction of their resources. Manufacture can be ramped up. The combined Nordic-Baltic GDP alone is bigger than Russia’s. Russia could and should be defeated," Landsbergis stressed.

The third myth is that Russia will get tired and want to settle. "Putin's goals have not changed. He still believes he can achieve them. He will only settle as a timeout before the next aggression. He will keep reigniting the conflict. He announced a crusade, so he cannot stop," Landsbergis noted.

He further debunks the myth that Crimea is a red line for Putin. "Putin has announced many red lines. He threatened huge consequences if Ukraine’s allies sent any help at all, but his red lines keep evaporating. Internationally agreed borders must be respected without fear. Crimea is Ukraine," Lithuania’s top diplomat underscored.

Landsbergis also does not agree that the world can go back to business as usual with Putin. " Putin is far too heavily invested in his crusade against the West. He cannot turn back. He sees our peace offerings as weakness and uses them against us. He should be in court, not in power," he noted.

According to the minister, the sixth myth is that all wars end with negotiations. "WWII didn’t end with negotiations. Peace can only be sustainable if Putin is defeated. Ongoing negotiations with Putin would lead only to recurring conflict. Swift, full victory is the only guarantee of lasting peace," he stated.

Finally, Landsbergis debunks the myth that the Baltics and Poland only want revenge. " Reality: After centuries of Russian aggression we want security. We know we cannot expect security without a just and lasting peace in Ukraine. It's simple: Peace means respecting borders," he concluded.