The President of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, and Brazilian leader Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva expressed their condemnation of Russia's military invasion of Ukraine and its severe consequences for the world economy, but at the same time, the meeting revealed certain differences in attitude toward the ways to end the war.

The leaders expressed their vision of the situation during a joint statement following their meeting in the capital of Brazil, an Ukrinform correspondent reports.

"The war has returned to the heart of Europe, it reflects all the complexities of the challenges of the time in which we live. I reminded President von der Leyen that Brazil voted in favor of the UN resolution condemning Russia's invasion of Ukraine. I reiterated that there must be a path to peace, as further escalation and the use of force carries enormous risks," Brazilian leader noted.

"There is no military solution to this conflict. We need more diplomacy in response to invasions of Ukraine, Palestine, or Yemen. The horrors of war and the suffering of people cannot be solved in a selective way, the fundamental principles of international law must be valid for everyone," added Lula da Silva.

In turn, the President of the European Commission recognized that Brazil is one of the countries that suffered from the consequences of Russia's war of aggression against Ukraine, and expressed high appreciation for Brazil’s position, which internationally condemns such actions on the part of Russia.

"We are strategic partners, and we need to work together to address global challenges, this also includes Russia's war on Ukraine. Because the impact of Russia's war goes well beyond Ukraine's border. It affects the global economy, from energy markets to food security. Brazil also felt it, with difficulty of supply of fertilisers, higher energy prices and inflation. But beyond that, this war is also a severe threat to the principles of international law and the UN Charter, which I know is so very dear to Brazil," said von der Leyen.

She noted that Russian aggression against Ukraine poses a direct threat to the global order, including to the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity of the countries enshrined in the UN Charter.

"We appreciate Brazil's very clear condemnation of this war in multilateral fora. Together with Ukraine, we want a just, comprehensive and lasting peace. The international community needs to address this challenge. We discussed the peace plans that are on the table, President Zelenskyy's Peace Formula that is on the table. And Brazil will have an important role to play as the upcoming G20 chair. You can count on our full support," stressed Ursula von der Leyen.

The parties expressed their intention to deepen the strategic partnership, in particular, in economic development and trade, the fight against climate change, digital transformation, supply of raw materials, and production of semiconductors.

As Lula da Silva noted, during the presidency of the G20, which Brazil will accept next year, the country's government will focus the efforts of the G20 on achieving the goals of sustainable development, combating climate change, and overcoming poverty and inequality around the world.