Russia bears full responsibility for its unjustified and unprovoked war of aggression against Ukraine, which is a blatant violation of international law and the basic principles of the UN Charter.

That's according to the Vilnius Summit Communique, which has been published on the NATO website, Ukrinform reports.

"Russia bears full responsibility for its illegal, unjustifiable, and unprovoked war of aggression against Ukraine, which has gravely undermined Euro-Atlantic and global security and for which it must be held fully accountable. We continue to condemn in the strongest terms Russia's blatant violations of international law, the Charter of the United Nations, and OSCE commitments and principles. We do not and will never recognize Russia's illegal and illegitimate annexations, including Crimea," the document reads.

NATO leaders stressed that there can be no impunity for Russian war crimes and other atrocities, such as attacks against civilians and the destruction of civilian infrastructure that deprives millions of Ukrainians of basic human services. All those responsible must be held accountable for violations and abuses of human rights and international humanitarian law, particularly against Ukraine’s civilian population, including the forced deportation of children and conflict-related sexual violence.

"The destruction of the Kakhovka dam highlights the brutal consequences of the war started by Russia. Russia's war has had a profound impact on the environment, nuclear safety, energy and food security, the global economy, and the welfare of billions of people around the world. Allies are working to enable exports of Ukrainian grain and actively support international efforts to alleviate the global food crisis," the communique reads.

A two-day NATO summit began in Vilnius on Tuesday, July 11. The main topics on the agenda are the strengthening of the Alliance's deterrence and defense system, continued assistance to Ukraine, as well as the issue of bringing Ukraine closer to NATO membership.