You can find more such articles on the Onet's main page

"The least expensive way to move forward is to provide Ukrainians with what they need now, to provide them with tools and resources they need today," Pompeo told Fox News supporting Trump."The prolonged conflict will be much more expensive than providing them with this weapon quickly, ensuring effective training and ending it."

His statement took place after a recent visit to Kiev, where he chaired a delegation of politicians and businessmen at a meeting with the Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelnski, who emphasized the importance of further investing American companies in Ukraine when she fights Russia's invasion.

"We are glad that the United States stands at our side and fight us for common goals," said Zelnski."We feel both two -party support in Congress and support from the White House."

Contrary to colleagues from the party

Pompeo's position on satisfying the military needs of Ukraine is contrary to the suggestions of many prominent Republicans to re -consider the volume of help sent by the United States.

Donald Trump believes that Russia will "ultimately" take over the whole of Ukraine, and the governor of Florida Ron Desantis (which will probably soon announce its candidacy) described the war as a "territorial dispute", although he later called Putin a "war criminal".

The Pompeo visit emphasizes the ideological struggle to support Ukraine not only among some Republicans, but also Democrats.

"There are those to the left and right who question continuous support or its height. This will certainly be part of the debate," said Republican Michael Turner during a visit to Ukraine, who is chaired by the interview committee in the House of Representatives."But the vast majority is support for continuing help for Ukraine so that they can continue to fight with this aggression of Russia."

If this is true - that the Americans "in the overwhelming majority" support such expensive help for Ukraine - it was Pompeo and the former US ambassador at the UN Nikki Haley and several other probable pretenders to the presidency are in a good situation.

But in the Republican party it does not seem to be popular now.The Axios/Ipsos March survey showed that only 42 percentRepublicans support the supply of weapons and financial support for Ukraine.