Lukashenko is a close ally of Russia president Vladimir Putin, providing military support in the invasion of Ukraine.

Sabalenka, who could become the women's world number one at the French Open, is one of Belarus' highest-profile athletes.

Since the war started in February 2022, she has been under pressure to distance herself from the nation's leader.

Ukrainian player Marta Kostyuk criticised Sabalenka after their first-round match for "never saying she personally doesn't support this war".

Sabalenka has met Lukashenko on several occasions and was photographed alongside him at a New Year's Eve function in 2020.

Earlier in 2020, there were mass protests in the eastern European country after Lukashenko claimed victory in an election widely viewed as rigged.

Opposition activists accused police of brutal tactics - including beating up protesters, using water cannons and stun grenades - as they disputed the presidential election.

After the Minsk-born player won her first major at the Australian Open in January, Lukashenko congratulated Sabalenka on the triumph and was seen toasting her success in an online video.

He later said people knew which country she hailed from even if she was playing under a neutral flag.

"I said it many times already, I'm not supporting war. I don't want my country to be involved in any conflict," she said on Tuesday.

"I said it many times, and you know where I stand, you know. You have my position. You have my answer. I answered it many times. I'm not supporting the war.

"I don't want sport to be involved in politics, because I'm just a tennis player, a 25-years-old tennis player.

"If I would like to be political I wouldn't be here. I don't want to be involved in any politics. I just want to be a tennis player."

Sabalenka was speaking in her first open news conference since Wednesday, having skipped them after her previous two matches for her "own mental health and well-being".

She had been challenged by a Ukrainian reporter about whether she supported Lukashenko and, after declining to answer the question, later said she did not "feel safe" during Wednesday's news conference.

"I felt like my press conference became a political TV show, and I'm not expert in politics. I'm just a tennis player," said Sabalenka.

"I had a few days to switch off from the press conference, few days to bring myself together, few days to realise a couple of things.

"That's why I feel safer. And nobody's putting words in my mouth, that's another reason."