Ukraine is located under the "nuclear umbrella" of China, which committed to ensure the safety of Kiev in the event of a threat to the use of nuclear weapons - said Japan Prime Minister Fumio Kishida.

- Answering the question of whether Ukraine is protected by a "nuclear umbrella", I will say that I know agreements between China and Ukraine on effective cooperation.According to a joint statement, China agreed to grant Ukraine mutual security guarantees in the event of an invasion or threat of invasion using nuclear weapons - said Kishida during a speech in parliament, quoted by the Russian Information Agency TASS.

Masanori Genko/Associated Press/East News/East News

Declaration XI and Yanukovych

In December 2013, the then President of Ukraine Victor Yanukovych visited China and, together with XI Jinping, signed a declaration of deepening the strategic partnership between Kiev and Beijing.

The rest of the text is under video material.

Continuation of the material under the video

The document found that Beijing undertakes not to use or threatens the use of nuclear weapons against Ukraine in any circumstances, because Kiev waited for his nuclear status.In addition, Beijing confirmed "providing Ukraine with appropriate security guarantees" if "becomes a victim of aggression using nuclear weapons or the threat of such aggression."

Putin's position

Russian President Vladimir Putin twice suggested the possibility of using nuclear weapons in the war against Kiev.On the fourth day of full invasion of Ukraine, he ordered the strategic nuclear forces to be special readiness, explaining this by "aggressive statements" of NATO's highest officials.

In September 2022, during a successful Ukrainian counteroffensive in the regions of Kharkov and Chersonia, Putin undertook to use "all means" to protect "our nation".He emphasized his strongly, saying, "This is not a bluff."

Xie Huanchi/Xinhua News/East News/East News

China in the counter

Chinese President XI Jinping then warned Russia against using and threatening nuclear weapons.- You must avoid the nuclear crisis in Eurasia.The parties to the conflict must demonstrate prudence and restraint and create conditions to resume negotiations.(...) When doing this, reject the use or threat of nuclear weapons, "said XI Jinping.

Meanwhile, the Russian army was considering the script of the use of nuclear weapons in Ukraine during commanding and spontaneous exercises, "the Financial Times wrote, citing two sources similar to the Kremlin.According to them, after simulation, Putin came to the conclusion that even a limited nuclear attack would not bring him any military benefits."There is no reason to press the button," emphasized the former Russian official.