Russia poses the greatest threat to peace and security in the entire Euro-Atlantic area in the foreseeable future, and Germany and its partners will continue to support Ukraine.

Olaf Scholz, the Chancellor of Germany, said this while presenting the National Security Strategy: Integrated Security for Germany," an Ukrinform correspondent reported.

"Russia's aggressive war against Ukraine is a violation of international law and the European security order. Today's Russia is the greatest threat to peace and security in the Euro-Atlantic region for the foreseeable future," the document, the first of its kind in German history, reads.

"Russia's brutal war of aggression against Ukraine poses a fundamental challenge to the European security order... That is why it is so important to support Ukraine," the German Chancellor said at the presentation of the document.

According to him, Germany is currently second after the United States in terms of financial, humanitarian, and weapons support to Ukraine, and will continue to provide support as long as Ukraine is forced to defend itself.

In this context, the politician also mentioned the establishment of a rapid process of repairing weapons donated and damaged in combat - in Slovakia, Romania and soon in Poland. This is very important now, he said.

Scholz called it necessary to provide security guarantees for Ukraine in the future. Very specific, intensive, and "trusting" discussions have been underway with the most important partners and with Ukraine for some time now, he said.

"We are talking about preparing for how we can guarantee security when the current situation ends," he added, without providing specifics.

The head of the German government emphasized the inadmissibility of freezing the conflict or forcing Ukraine to an unjust peace, as some have demanded.

"We are not demanding freezing or legitimizing the theft of Ukraine's territories...We do not accept a dictated peace. Russia must withdraw its troops," Scholz emphasized.

Read also: Ukraine asks Germany to provide more tanks

The presentation of the document, the first of its kind in German history, was attended by Chancellor Olaf Scholz, Ministers of Finance Christian Lindner, Defense Boris Pistorius, Foreign Affairs Annalena Burbock and Interior Nancy Feser. The document was approved by the federal government on Wednesday.