China provided Russia with drones and parts to them worth over $ 12 million, "New York Times said.According to the journal, this indicates "quiet cooperation" between these countries.As the newspaper added, it is not known whether Chinese drones contain American technologies that would violate American regulations on sanctions after the brutal Russian invasion of Ukraine.

As the newspaper reminded in Tuesday's publication, although the administration of US President Joe Biden promised to deal with companies that sell key technologies of Russia, it, however, a permanent influx of Chinese drones to Russia indicates that it will be difficult.

"American sanctions against Russia introduced after its brutal attack on Ukraine failed to stop the import of drones by Moscow," wrote the New York Times.

"NYT": From the beginning of the invasion, China has sold Russia drones for over $ 12 million

As we read, according to the official Russian customs data obtained from an external data provider, during the year of an outbreak of a full -glass invasion of Ukraine, China sold Russia to Drones and parts for them for over $ 12 million.

"It is not known whether Chinese drones contain American technologies that would violate American rules," the newspaper wrote."Complicated sales channels and unclear product descriptions in export data make it difficult to determine whether in Chinese products there are American components, which could be a violation of American export control. And official sales are probably only part of a larger flow of technology by unofficial channels and other Russia friendly countries, Russia,such as Kazakhstan, Pakistan and Belarus, "explained the daily.

"The effect of this is a constant influx of new drones to Russia, which this country uses on the front in Ukraine. Supplementing the stocks of even the most basic drone models has become just as important as replenishing ammunition" - the New York Times pointed out.

Climbous Chinese-Russian ties

China has become Russia's greatest ally in terms of military, diplomatic and economic.They are one of the largest buyers of Russian oil, which helps in financing the invasion of Ukraine, and also conducted joint military exercises with this country.The leader of China, XI Jinping, meets this week with President Vladimir Putin, which, according to American analysts, may mean that China is still considering selling weapons to Russians.

The American Secretary of State Antony Blinken said on Monday that the Chinese leader's visit is a "diplomatic cover" for Moscow.He added that Russia is committing and will continue to commit war crimes.

"Although the United States is trying to limit it, the world remains largely dependent on Chinese electronics and equipment assembly manufacturers," wrote the New York Times.

"This is a challenge for export control: the same device can be used by people from the real estate industry to assess the property and can be used in Ukraine for intelligence purposes," said William A. Reinsch from the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, quoted bynewspaper.

Author/author: AKR/DAP

Source: PAP, "New York Times"