Olaf Scholz told XI Jinping that Russia's invasion of Ukraine on a full scale threatens global security.During the meeting in Beijing, the German Chancellor insisted that the Chinese leader would put more pressure on Russia, a neighbor and a close strategic partner of China to end the war.

"The word China is important in Russia. That's why I asked President XI to put pressure on Russia, so that Putin finally stop his crazy campaign, withdraw his troops and ended this terrible war" - wrote the German Chancellor on Platform X on the X on the last day of a three -day visit to China.

Expand

Olaf Scholz came to China on Sunday in the company of a delegation composed of managers of German companies, including Mercedes-Benz and BMW, who want to maintain their lucrative place on the Chinese market.

The Chancellor in his preliminary remarks before talking to the XI pointed out that the war has "a very significant negative impact on security in Europe" and "directly affects our basic interests", and also indirectly harms the entire international order.

Russia's actions "violate the principle of the United Nations Card and the principle of inviolability of state borders," said Scholz, quoted by German media.

XI: We must create the conditions necessary to restore the room

In terms of Ukraine, XI presented during the meeting "Four rules" that are to prevent "the crisis from being out of control and restore peace.""We should focus on maintaining peace and stability and refrain from selfish use of the situation," XI Jinping announced, calling for "maneuvering oil to fire".

"We must create the conditions necessary to restore peace" and "reduce repercussions for the world economy" - appealed the Chinese leader.

Scholz and XI on the economic cooperation of China with Germany

"President XI and I came to an agreement: China and Germany intend to intensively and positively coordinate the promotion of the organization of a high -level conference" which Switzerland plans to organize on June 15 and 16 - added Scholz in the next post on Platform X.

China has so far refused to criticize the invasion and maintain relations with Russia.Although the authorities in Beijing claim that they do not send military assistance to Moscow, they strengthen economic cooperation, which allows Moscow to reduce the impact of sanctions from the West.

Speaking of economic issues, Scholz announced that Europe wants to reduce the risk, intensify existing contacts and build new ones.Scholz noted that China agreed to the import of German apples and beef.

Cooperation between China and Germany "does not pose a threat to security", but is a guarantee of stable ties and a chance for the future - argued the leader of the Chinese People's Republic, according to the note published on the pages of the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs.- Chinese export of electric vehicles, lithium batteries and solar products (solar panels) is a huge contribution to global efforts to fight climate change - said XI.

The leader of the People's Republic of China noted that "both sides should be careful about the increase in protectionism", repeating the rhetoric of the Chinese department of trade and diplomacy, which last week expressed "concern" in connection with the investigations initiated by the European Commission, among otherson the subsidy by Beijing Chinese manufacturers of electric cars and wind turbines.

Author/author: Asty