795 days ago, Russia's armed invasion of Ukraine began.The Russian forces attacked several Ukrainian circuits using Shahed's assault drones.A powerful explosion was heard in the area of the Russian Military Airport in an annexed Crimea.We sum up what happened in the last hours in Ukraine and around it.

> At night from Saturday to Sunday, the Shahed hostile drone movement was registered in many circuits of Ukraine, the Ukrainian Air Force informed.The unmanneders flew towards circuits, includingMikołajowski, Chmielnicki and Poltawski.There were explosions in Mikołajów.The explosions were also audible in the area of the Military Airport in the City of Starokonstinów in the Chmielnica region.Air alarm was in force in many regions of the country.

> Russia attacked 34 rockets on Saturday in several Ukrainian circuits.As President Wołodymyr Zelnski, the goal was energy infrastructure facilities.He added that Russia focused its attention on facilities relevant to gas supplies to the European Union.

> The head of the Kharkiv region Oleh Synahubow announced that a hospital in Kharkov was hit during a rocket attack."The S-300 hit on the territory of the 3rd Psychiatric Hospital. As a result of shelling, windows, roof and interior of the rooms, closed building, the building of the nutrition department, branch building No. 14 and the boiler room were damaged. A 53-year-old woman was wounded," he said.

Rocket crater at the Regional Clinical Psychiatric Hospital No. 3 in Kharkov PAP/MyKola Kasyeniak

> The Russians will not celebrate May 9 Day of victory in World War II in the occupied areas in Ukraine - the Portal of Special Operations forces of Ukraine, the Center of National Opposition, informed.The occupation authorities made such a decision in fear of "provocations" - said the portal.

> In the region of the Russian Military Airport in Dżankoj, a powerful explosion was heard from Saturday to Sunday at night from Saturday to Sunday - the channels on the telegram said.The airport is the main logistics junction of the Russian army and the place of landing of assault helicopters.S-300 and S-400 launchers are also stationed there.The building was attacked by Ukrainian forces also in mid -April.

Jankjj in Crimea Google Maps

> The authorities of Latvia, the Baltic state bordering Russia, appealed to citizens on Saturday to transform basements and other underground rooms of their homes into anti -aircraft shelters.The appeal was made on the occasion of the traditional day of cleaning and ordering the country.According to the AFP agency, the Riga government is afraid that in the event of Russia's victory in the war with Ukraine, their country will become one of Moscow's first goals.

> The British expert Matthew Savill assessed in the "Guardian" daily that until recently 400,000 Russian soldiers took part in the war in Ukraine, but soon this number may increase to 500,000 and this may mean the beginning of the Russian offensive.Therefore - he says - it is necessary to find a way to acquire new soldiers to the Ukrainian army.

> Mental problems of Russian soldiers, such as post -traumatic stress syndrome or desensitization, intensified by low morale, alcohol and drugs, result in a growing number of murders they make - the British Ministry of Defense said on Saturday.

> We estimate that in Poland there are tens of thousands of persons in conscript age - said in TVN24 Ambassador of Ukraine in Poland Wasyl Zarycz.As he said, Kiev wants to check and verify it carefully."It's all about two things: justice and duty," he said.

Ambassador Wasyl Zwarycz about the mobilization of Ukrainians staying abroad TVN24

> The Russian "Fleet Ghost" transports oil and weapons in front of the west and bypassing sanctions - the Italian daily "Corriere della Sera" wrote on Saturday.Armament transported by ships goes to the Ukrainian front.

Author/author: PP, TAS

Source: PAP