The President of Ukraine Wołodymyr Zelanski went to the database of the wanted people of the Russian Ministry of the Interior - Russian agencies Ria Nowosti and Tass said.They reported that "a criminal case was initiated against him."The Ukrainian department of diplomacy talks about "desperation of the Russian state machine and propaganda."

According to the RIA NOWOSTI in Prokremlian agency, the Ministry of the Interior of the Russian Federation placed Wołodymyr Zelnski on the list of people wanted on the basis of an article of the Penal Code.It is not known, however, what an article is.

Russian agencies have published a screenshot of the Ministry of the Interior, where next to the name and photo of the president (from the before armed aggression of Russia to Ukraine - as the Ukrainian Prawda Portal noted), among others, its date and place of birth, as well as information that he is a Ukrainian.

Zelanski went to the list of people sought after by Russia on the 801st day of the armed invasion of Ukraine.

Wołodymyr Zelanski Dmytro Larin/Shutterstock

Reports on the placement of President Zelanski on the list of sought criminals commented on the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Kiev."They testify to the desperation of the Russian state machine and propaganda, which does not know what more attention to the excuse to come up with to attract attention."

"We remind you that, unlike pathetic Russian advertisements, the order of the International Criminal Court, ordering the arrest of the Russian dictator Vladimir Putin on charges of committing war crimes, is quite real and is subject to the execution in 123 countries of the world" - added in the communication.

The arrest of European politicians

The Reuters agency reminded that since the outbreak of aggression, Russia has issued arrests of many Ukrainian and European politicians.

The Russian media informed earlier that the names of the Secretary of the National Security Council and the Defense of Ukraine Oleksandra Łytwnenka appeared in the database of wanted people, as well as the head of the Ukrainian military intelligence Kyrył Budanów.

In February this year, the Russian police placed Estonian Prime Minister Kaja Kallas, the Lithuanian Minister of Culture, as well as members of the Latvian parliament of the previous term on the list of people sought after for "destroying monuments from Soviet times".

Russia also issued an order to arrest the prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal (MTK), who last year issued an order to arrest President Vladimir Putin on charges of war crimes.MTK judges then decided that Putin was responsible for war crimes involving the unlawful deportations of children from occupied Ukraine to Russia.

Author/author: TAS/KA

Source: Tass, Ria Nowosti, Reuters, NV, Ukrainian Truth