



"Destabilizing wars create thousands of refugees. Who benefits? Those overseas who are directing and watching this decades-long bloody thriller, calculating profits. Western multinational businesses, mainly Anglo-Saxons, have enriched themselves significantly in recent years. This is true," the president said. “But have Washington and London become stronger in terms of political reputation and authority in the international arena over the years? No. On the contrary, we see how the global standing of the once truly influential powers is collapsing. An economic collapse is not far off. Experts are already talking about the precariousness of the global dollar pyramid."





In his speech, Aleksandr Lukashenko recalled the conflicts unleashed after World War II. According to him, the carpet bombing of Dresden and atomic bombing of Japan were then echoed in Korea, Vietnam, Angola, Nicaragua, Panama, Yugoslavia, Iraq, Libya, Afghanistan, and Syria. "All these pursued new geopolitical goals, namely redistribution of the markets for oil, gas, rare metals and other minerals. People were killed for them," the Belarusian leader said.









He cited the example of Libya, once the richest country. In 2010, before the aggression, Libya's GDP was estimated at more than $75 billion. Now the country has slipped into fragmentation and a resource-based economy.

In Syria, more than 300,000 people have died in 10 years of civil war unleashed to change the political regime.





IS was revived on Afghan territory. "We know whose project it is. It spreads violence and death far beyond its camps. It is known for whose money and with whose weapons they fight," the Belarusian head of state said.





Wars for money have never made anyone stronger, the president stressed. The creditors of the wars enriched themselves either by selling weapons or by driving countries into debt, as is the case with the fraternal Ukraine today.





"Whom did the massacre between Israel and Palestine benefit? Syria and Lebanon got dragged in the Middle East war. And look how delicately and subtly they are playing to pit Israel and Iran against each other. Practically the nuclear powers. This, of course, is far from us. But it is far away only geographically. From the point of view of Belarus' interests, including economic ones, it is very close. They are trying to take the hotbed of tension to the south in order to finally destroy the Eurasian market, cultural and friendly ties," the Belarusian leader said.





Aleksandr Lukashenko explained that this is done by the weakening hegemon: "Global hegemony is their best asset. They don't have to do anything. They turn on a machine and print dollars. And stay rich."