"The Washington Post" reports that, according to analysts, the Russian Federation increased military production, supplementing weapons and ammunition.This is probably to maintain an attack on Ukraine for at least the next two years."It is a sobering rating for Kiev, who lacks weapons and soldiers and who loses the ground under the feet on the battlefield," says the American daily.

ADVERTISEMENT

See the video fell into a pawnshop with a pickax in hand and a sack on his head.He stole some jewelry

Russia is preparing for a longer war with Ukraine.Experts are alarming

"The Washington Post" notes that Russia rose in a surprising way after losses in Ukraine. "- Russia does not produce more modern combat equipment.But it produces much more simpler equipment: rifles, missiles - said Nikolai Kulbaka, a Russian economist in an interview with Gazeta.To increase supply, Russia, among other things, has concluded a contract with Iran to create a Shaad drone factory in Tatarstan.

As noted, because Western military assistance for Kiev has been slowed down in recent months, Russian forces regained the initiative in Ukraine.General Christopher G. Cavoli, the chief commander of the US armed forces in Europe, testified in Congress that Russia now has more soldiers than at the beginning of the invasion, and its armed forces "showed accelerated ability to learn and adapt to challenges on the battlefield both in terms of battle, both in tactical termsand technological. "

At the end of 2023, Vladimir Putin approved a record increase in military expenditure for 2024.About $ 115 billion, almost one third of the country's year's budget was planned for the army.

In Russia, a firearm trade is flourishing from the front

The independent Russian portal is important, Istoria has announced that in Russia weapons trade in the front of the front.The journalistic investigation showed that soldiers and special services officers take rifles, grenades and even manual rocket launchers.AK-12 and AK-74 rifles, which are equipped with the Russian army, had, for example, terrorists who killed 144 people in the attack on the Crocus City Hall complex in March.

The investigation in this matter was conducted by journalists, important is Istoria.The portal contacted experts in Russia and other countries.Journalist Anastasija Briuchanowa on the online channel The lens pointed out that the AK-12 rifle is a weapon that the Russian army got only six years ago.

"It turns out that it is not difficult to buy weapons on the black market. In Russia, trade is usually done in Darknet and the Telegram online channels. A huge range is available. Pistols and rifles are the most popular. The price is several hundred thousand rubles, and the demandIt is large because, as the buyer say, the situation in the country is bad and it will be even worse, "it was established.According to experts, the peak of inflow to Russia will take place after the war.Experts emphasize that when starting a war, it must always be borne in mind that she returns to the one who started it.