Minister of Finance Andrzej Domański met on Saturday with Garrim Kasparov - a Russian chess player and an opponent of Vladimir Putin's rule.The conversation was to concern, among others, the issue of security and support of the Ukrainian side in the ongoing conflict.

ADVERTISEMENT

See the video what country, such spies.The Polish judge escaped to Belarus

Andrzej Domański met with Garrim Kasparov."After the meeting Fast Party of Chess"

"Meeting with the chess grandmaster Garrim Kasparov - a defender of democratic values and an oppositionist fighting with the regime in Moscow. We talked about security in Europe, i.e. the support of Ukraine in the face of war. After the meeting, a quick party of chess. Kasparow won" - wrote the Minister of Finance on the portal X. EntryDomański was provided with photos from the meeting.

At the request of one of the commentators, the minister wrote the course of the party.

Garri Kasparow is a Russian chess grandmaster.He became the world champion in chess in 1985.He was 22 years old at the time, and therefore he became the youngest person who obtained this title.He defended the world championship until 2000, when he lost to Vladimir Kramnik.He continued his professional career until 2005.When he announced her ending, he was the highest chess player in the world ranking.

Garri Kasparow has been operating against the Vladimir Putin regime for nearly two decades

After the end of the professional chess career, Kasparov devoted himself to writing books and political activities.In 2005 he founded a united citizens' front.The party, whose declared goal was to restore democracy, became part of the Antiputin coalition, another Russia.He reported readiness to start in the presidential election in 2008.However, he withdrew due to the inability to meet the legal requirements regarding renting space for public assemblies.In his opinion, problems in this respect were caused by government pressure.

In the following years, Kasparov continued his political activity and participated in local protests of the democratic opposition against the Vladimir Putin regime.In 2013, he decided to leave Russia because of the fears of the persecution of political dissidents.Since then, he has been continuing his political activity abroad.Over the past decade, Kasparov has opposed, among others, the annexation of Crimea and invasion of Ukraine.In March this year, the Moscow regime entered it on the government list of "terrorists and extremists".A month later he issued a arrest warrant behind him.