affiliate fee of up. piss on drones and electronic warfare
ukrainian special forces are taking part in combat operations in sudan against rebels and russian forces as part of a strategy to undermine russia's military and economic operations abroad, the wall street journal reports.
source: the wall street journal
literally: "for ukraine, sending troops to africa is a bold new adventure - part of a strategy to undermine russia's military and economic operations abroad, to make war more expensive for moscow and to position itself as a bulwark against russian incursions, including in regions where the west is unwilling to get directly involved."
details: according to the newspaper, the head of the sovereign council of the republic of sudan, abdel fattah al-burgan, asked president volodymyr zelenskyy for help after sudan secretly supplied ukraine with weapons in 2022.
according to several ukrainian soldiers who took part in the operation, cited by the publication, a few weeks after the call, ukrainian special forces landed in sudan and began fighting to drive rebel forces out of the capital khartoum.
"the front line in the war between ukraine and russia now extends to africa," the wsj states.
at the same time, the publication says, "the operation carries significant political risk at a time when western support for ukraine is wavering."
"in sudan, ukraine is intervening in an internal conflict in a foreign country where tens of thousands of civilians have been killed and the united states says both sides have committed war crimes. u.s. secretary of state anthony blinken warned that any country that provides material support "is responsible for fomenting atrocities against the sudanese people," the wsj writes.
in a comment to the newspaper, the head of the gru, kirill budanov, refused to say whether the military had been sent to sudan, but he did provide a rationale for sending them. "war is a risky business. we are waging a full-fledged war with russia... they have units in different parts of the world, and we sometimes try to strike them there," he emphasized.
according to the newspaper, the ukrainian military has also begun training sudanese soldiers in some of the same tactics that helped them deter the larger russian army, including the use of drones.
in particular, according to the wsj, the ukrainians helped to deliver turkish bayraktar tb2 drones capable of conducting precision air strikes to sudan in february.
"ukraine's influence is still felt in sudan. in recent weeks, burgan's forces have regained control over a large part of omdurman, their first significant breakthrough in the conflict. experts attribute these successes largely to precision drone strikes, as well as the deployment of elite sudanese army units. kyiv has also recently sent a shipment of wheat flour to port sudan, which arrived last week," the wsj article says.
what happened before: on november 6, 2023, the kyiv post published two videos that allegedly showed ukrainian special forces hunting wagner pmc mercenaries in sudan, although the ukrainian government has not officially recognized the deployment of combat units in sudan or operations against wagner in that country.
any copying, publication, reprinting or further distribution of information containing a link to interfax-ukraine is strictly prohibited.
materials marked promoted are promotional and are published on the basis of advertising. the editorial staff may not share the views promoted in them.
materials with the special project and supported by the editorial board are also advertising, but the editorial board participates in the preparation of this content and shares the opinions expressed in these materials.
materials with the review label may contain advertising.
the editorial board is not responsible for the facts and value judgments published in advertising materials. according to ukrainian law, the advertiser is responsible for the content of advertising.
online media entity; media identifier - r40-02280.
up media plus llc. all rights reserved.
the founder of the project: georgiy gongadze
editor-in-chief: sevgil musayeva
founding editor: olena prytula
editorial e-mail: editor@pravda.ua