thursday, 09 may 2024, 23:13
this is reported by radio liberty, ukrinform saw.
as part of the performance, the activists unfurled the ukrainian flag, which "attacks" the vehicle with the image of the "z-monster", symbolizing the kremlin regime and the russian army, which has launched an invasion of ukraine and is committing massive war crimes. in the finale, the "z-monster" is tackled by a banner with the inscription "estonia's 0.25% gdp plan stop russia."
"this is an initiative by czech activists, and we joined them. we have a mock-up of russia - a monster with crushed buildings in its mouth, which the russians are still bombing... and the ‘estonian plan’ will help the flag of the european union to drive this monster away from ukraine," said the leader of the "voice of ukraine" initiative anastasia sihnaievska.
the co-organizer of the rally, michal meisner, noted that the performance aims to support the estonian proposal to allocate at least 0.25% of gdp from each eu member state to support ukraine. according to the activist, these funds should be enough to force russia to stop the war because in this case "they will not be able to drag it on financially."
"our financial capacity is great... therefore, it is very sad to see how ukraine, which protects europe, doesn’t have everything it needs. they have no money. so the problem is not about supplies. estonia believes that the czech initiative (regarding the purchase of ammunition for ukraine - ed.) will be sufficient. the problem is about financing," meisner said.
as reported, the ministry of defense of estonia has drawn up a eur 120 billion plan to help embattled ukraine.
prime minister of estonia, kaja kallas, stated that the military might of the countries that are part of the coalition supporting ukraine is 13 times greater than that of russia, and if these countries give kyiv at least 0.25% of their gdp, it will create a turning point in the war and ensure that ukraine prevails.
photo: radio svoboda
topics
agency
while citing and using any materials on the internet, links to the website ukrinform.net not lower than the first paragraph are mandatory. in addition, citing the translated materials of foreign media outlets is possible only if there is a link to the website ukrinform.net and the website of a foreign media outlet. materials marked as "advertisement" or with a disclaimer reading "the material has been posted in accordance with part 3 of article 9 of the law of ukraine "on advertising" no. 270/96-vr of july 3, 1996 and the law of ukraine "on the media" no. 2849-х of march 31, 2023 and on the basis of an agreement/invoice.
© 2015-2024 ukrinform. all rights reserved.
website design  studio laconica