the australian government has announced a new $100m assistance package for ukraine, which includes munitions and military equipment, during a visit to the country by the deputy prime minister, richard marles.

australia’s package will include $50m in military assistance, including $30m towards uncrewed aerial systems, and $15m towards other high-priority equipment such as combat helmets, rigid hull inflatable boats, boots, fire masks and generators.

it will also include the delivery of air-to-ground precision munitions and $50m in short-range air defence systems.

during his visit, marles met the ukrainian prime minister, denys shmyhal, and deputy minister of defence, lt gen ivan havryliuk.

he said australia remained committed to the ukrainian war effort, as the country struggles to hold back russian advances.

“australia remains committed to supporting ukraine to resolve the conflict on its terms,” he said.

“i am pleased to announce an additional $100m of military assistance, including world-leading drone technology, with the support of local australian defence industry.”

as part of his visit, marles met members of the armed forces of ukraine during training exercises and had the opportunity to tour the local defence industry, which has been integral in ukraine’s defence against russia.

marles said his meeting with shmyhal “reaffirmed” that the spirit of the ukrainian people remained strong, with the war recently crossing the two-year mark.

“ukraine and its people have endured more than two years of russia’s full-scale invasion but their spirit remains strong. this was reaffirmed during my meeting with prime minister shmyhal.

“australia is proud to be working with our partners, including poland, to support ukraine’s self-defence,” he said.

skip past newsletter promotion sign up to afternoon update free daily newsletter our australian afternoon update breaks down the key stories of the day, telling you what’s happening and why it matters privacy notice: newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. for more information see our newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. for more information see our privacy policy . we use google recaptcha to protect our website and the google privacy policy and terms of service apply. after newsletter promotion

marles also reaffirmed australia’s commitment to the multinational program to train ukrainian armed forces personnel in the uk, through operation kudu.

as part of his trip, he also visited poland, and met with the deputy prime minister and minister of defence, władysław kosiniak-kamysz.

as part of his conversation with his counterpart, marles thanked the polish government for its support of the recent six-month deployment of a royal australian air force e-7a wedgetail which helped protect a vital gateway of international humanitarian and military assistance to ukraine.

the new package brings australia’s overall support to ukraine to more than $1bn, which includes $880m in assistance for ukraine’s military.

that support has included providing 120 bushmaster vehicles, six m777 155mm lightweight towed howitzers, 56 m113as4 armoured vehicles, 14 special operations vehicles as well as munitions.

the government also announced a $50m grant to the international fund for ukraine in february, and said it would extend and expand operation kudu over two years to deliver additional support for ukraine.