



a commemorative concert "every third" was held in the victory museum on poklonnaya hill in moscow on 6 may. "we thought it would be right to highlight the events of those years once again, to show the exhibition and archival materials," ambassador dmitry krutoi noted.

"by 3 july, we will hold several more local events. the museum of the great patriotic war, the belarusian news agency belta and our other institutes have accumulated a lot of material for the day. we will do our best to show once again, on the one hand, the tragedy and heroism of our ancestors, and on the other hand, the great joy that the day of liberation of belarus," the ambassador said.





the commemorative concert ‘every third’ was a tribute to the memory of all the victims and heroes of the great patriotic war, a story about the fate of ordinary people, a synthesis of new songs about war and victory and unique footage of the chronicle, historical facts. the concert featured honored artists of belarus ruslan alekhno, viktoria aleshko, janet, the academic song and dance ensemble of the armed forces of belarus, the male choir ‘all saints’ of the all saints memorial church in minsk, soloists of the bolshoi theater of belarus and the brass band of the main department of internal affairs of the minsk city executive committee, theater and film artists and many others.





the project supervisor and screenwriter was the poet anna seluk. the organizers of the concert were the musical media company, the youth variety theater, the embassy of belarus in russia, the defense ministry of belarus, the voen tv company, the voyen tv company, the vayar military news agency of the armed forces of belarus and the victory museum.

subscribe to us twitter

moscow, 7 may (belta) - a series of events will be held in the russian federation on the occasion of the 80th anniversary of the liberation of belarus from the nazi invaders, ambassador of belarus to russia dmitry krutoi told the media in moscow on 6 may, belta has learned.