moscow. march 7. interfax.ru - chairman of the state duma committee on international affairs leonid slutsky said that a draft appeal to german parliamentarians has been submitted to the state duma in connection with the disclosure of information about the german military command's discussion of the german military command's discussion of taurus cruise missile deliveries to ukraine and their use for strikes on the crimean bridge.
"the draft appeal to the bundestag in connection with the leaked conversation of german officers has been submitted to the state duma. we propose to put the issue up for discussion on march 12," slutsky told reporters on thursday.
according to him, in the draft appeal, state duma deputies call on the bundestag to prevent "actions that draw germany into an armed conflict on the side of the fascist-terrorist ukrainian regime."
"numerous facts testifying to the use of western weapons and ammunition by ukraine, as well as the participation of servicemen of the united states, britain, france and other nato countries, including germany, in the fighting in ukraine, including as instructors and military specialists engaged in the maintenance of sophisticated military equipment, give every reason to assert the credibility and extreme danger of the plans hatched by the leadership of the bundeswehr," the document reads.
the state duma deputies call on the bundestag to conduct an objective investigation into the participation of bundeswehr servicemen in military operations on the territory of ukraine.
the parliamentarians also recall the treaty on the final settlement with respect to germany of september 12, 1990, "according to which only peace will come from german soil, and actions that can and are intended to destroy peace between peoples, especially the preparation to wage an offensive war, are unconstitutional and punishable."
"the state duma is convinced that the successful long-term experience of the soviet-german and russian-german settlement, the common sense of the german people and parliamentarians expressing their will, will prevent the catastrophe of direct armed confrontation between germany and russia, will bring closer the beginning of a mutually beneficial political dialog for the sake of peace and well-being in europe," the draft appeal says.