© 2024 cable news network.
a warner bros. discovery company.
all rights reserved.


cnn sans ™ & © 2024 cable news network.


			by joshua berlinger, amy cassidy
(cnn) -- french president emmanuel macron openly discussed the possibility of sending european troops to ukraine to help kyiv win the war against russia, a possible major escalation toward the largest ground war europe has seen since world war ii.

speaking at a press conference after hosting a summit to discuss ukraine on monday, macron told reporters that while he and the 21 other european leaders present did not agree on deploying military personnel, the prospect was openly discussed.
"nothing should be ruled out," he said. "we will do everything possible to prevent russia from winning this war."
as part of that effort, macron announced that a new coalition would be created to supply ukraine with medium- and long-range missiles.
"we are at a critical moment in this conflict that requires us to take the initiative," macron said.
with us$60 billion in u.s. funding for ukraine held up by republicans in congress, the burden has shifted to europe to help arm ukraine as it tries to defend itself against a russian military resurgence.
ukrainian soldiers on the front lines say they are already running low on ammunition, which has cost them dearly on the battlefield . ukrainian president volodymyr zelensky told cnn in a recent interview that "millions" could die if washington does not provide more aid to his country.
the european union has committed more than $150 billion in assistance to ukraine, but sending troops would be a drastic step, unthinkable when russia's president vladimir putin launched a full-scale invasion two years ago.
but macron noted that western democracies have gradually increased their support to levels unthinkable when the war began. he highlighted the example of germany, which offered helmets and sleeping bags to kyiv at the start of the conflict and now says more needs to be done to supply the country with missiles and tanks.
"the people who said 'never ever' today were the same people who said never ever planes, never ever long-range missiles, never ever trucks. they said all that two years ago," he said. "we have to be humble and realize that we have always been six to eight months late."
kremlin spokesman dmitry peskov said tuesday that such a deployment in ukraine would put the west at odds with moscow.
"in this case, we should talk not about the probability, but about the inevitability of a conflict," peskov said. "these countries should also assess this and be aware of it, asking themselves whether this is in the interests of the citizens of their countries."
kremlin officials have already made similar comments. foreign minister sergey lavrov said last year that the united states, the united kingdom and many others are "waging war" against russia and engaging in hostilities against the country by providing assistance to ukraine.
 
 
									
									

									
									
	
macron










© 2024 cable news network.
a warner bros. discovery company.
all rights reserved.


cnn sans ™ & © 2024 cable news network.