affiliate fee of up. piss on drones and electronic warfare
certain financial, economic, and military indicators indicate that russia is preparing for a large-scale conflict with nato using conventional weapons.
source: institute for the study of war (isw)
details: according to military analysts, an attack is likely to take place in a shorter timeframe than some western analysts have suggested, but not in the near term.
on march 19, russian president vladimir putin meets with the leaders of the state duma factions and outlines the priorities for his fifth presidential term.
he called on the leaders of the duma factions to act in the interests of the state, not corporations or parties, and emphasized the importance of appointing people based on qualifications and competence.
the russian leader is likely trying to create the conditions for stabilizing russia's long-term financial position on high levels of government spending and signaling that russia's long-term financial stability will require at least some inconvenience for wealthy russian power brokers with political influence.
the russian leader likely realizes that financial repression of security "businessmen" could jeopardize the political relations he has built with them and is trying to mitigate these consequences.
in addition, the isw states that russia does not seem to be facing a financial crisis, and the increase in military spending has been the biggest change in russian budget policy. therefore, analysts suggest that efforts to secure russia's financial future are likely to be aimed at creating long-term conditions rather than solving immediate financial problems.
russia continues to try to circumvent international sanctions, and the international monetary fund estimated that russia's gdp will grow by 2.6% in 2024 and reported that russia's gdp grew faster than the economies of all the group of seven (g7) countries in 2023.
isw notes that polish president andrzej duda in an interview with cnbc on march 20 stressed that putin is stepping up efforts to put russia's economy on a military track to be able to attack nato as early as 2026 or 2027, citing unspecified german studies.
danish defense minister troels lund poulsen said on february 9 that new intelligence indicates that russia could attempt to attack a nato country within three to five years, which is faster than nato's 2023 estimate.
the russian threat is largely dependent on the financial resources that putin is willing to devote to war. therefore, putin is obviously preparing for the risk of ruining his relations with wealthy russian businessmen. in this context, he constantly announces plans to expand the russian army.
putin's attempts to create conditions for the stabilization of the russian economy and finances are most likely part of russia's financial and domestic preparations for a potential future large-scale conflict with nato, not just a prolonged war in ukraine.
in addition, russia's military continues to implement structural reforms to simultaneously support the war in ukraine and expand russia's armed forces in the long term in preparation for a possible future large-scale conflict with nato.
russian defense minister sergei shoigu spoke to the board of the russian ministry of defense on march 20 and discussed military reforms to improve the combat capabilities of the russian army.
shoigu said that russia had formed the "dnipro river flotilla" and a "brigade" of boats within the flotilla.
russian and ukrainian sources confirmed that russian troops were able to make a limited raid and temporarily land on the western bank of kherson region on march 13, and that the dnipro river flotilla could actually support such attempts to cross the river.
shoigu outlined several ongoing efforts to bolster russia's military capabilities, more likely as part of russia's long-term efforts to prepare for a potential conventional war with nato than as part of a war against ukraine.
he claimed that russia has formed an army corps and a motorized rifle division.
shoigu also claimed that the russian military plans to form two combined arms armies, 14 divisions, and 16 brigades by the end of 2024.
the isw continues to assess that russia currently lacks the manpower, military infrastructure, and training capacity to properly staff several entirely new divisions.
such reforms, however, are likely aimed at building russia's long-term military capabilities.
personnel changes in the russian defense ministry may be additional indicators of russia's preparation for conflict in the long term.
shoigu introduced lieutenant general andrey bulyga as deputy defense minister for logistics during a speech at the defense ministry on march 20.
isw's key findings for march 20:
any copying, publication, reprinting or further distribution of information containing a link to interfax-ukraine is strictly prohibited.
materials marked promoted are promotional and are published on the basis of advertising. the editorial staff may not share the views promoted in them.
materials with the special project and supported by the editorial board are also advertising, but the editorial board participates in the preparation of this content and shares the opinions expressed in these materials.
materials with the review label may contain advertising.
the editorial board is not responsible for the facts and value judgments published in advertising materials. according to ukrainian law, the advertiser is responsible for the content of advertising.
entity in the field of online media; media identifier - r40-02280.
up media plus llc. all rights reserved.
the founder of the project: georgiy gongadze
editor-in-chief: sevgil musayeva
founding editor: olena prytula
editorial e-mail: editor@pravda.ua